
Outside the walls of Nola, there stood in the mid-16th century, Cicala, a hamlet of "four or five houses, none of them too imposing." Here, in 1548, was born to a soldier in the service of the Spanish masters of Naples, one Giovanni Bruno and his wife. The child was a boy.


2 Berti, D. G. B. da Nola, sua matrigna e sua dottrina, 1889, App., Doc. — Auvray, L. Mom. de la Soc. des Antiquaires de Paris et de la Seine-Inférieure, t. xx.


To Giordano Bruno,

An infant was destined to become a precursor of modern science and philosophy. He cast a searchlight into dark places and brought forth hidden things. It was his fate to wander as an excommunicated and fugitive priest through many lands, impelled partly by a restless nature but chiefly by a certain missionary zeal for truth and desire to set the intellect free from the fetters of authority. He endured strange vicissitudes in penury and years of solitary suffering at the hands of the Inquisition because he claimed "philosophic freedom in thought and speech." Finally, he passed from its cruel dungeons.


“A flame to the flames. He was born in the very year which saw an outbreak at Naples against a contemplated introduction of the Spanish Inquisition. Bruno tells us that his mother’s name was Fraulissa, possibly from a family called Savolini or Saulini. It is likely correct to connect her unusual baptismal name with German mercenaries, whose Italian wives might have been so named; and certainly, some of the multitude of mercenary troops drawn from beyond the Alps had settled in the neighborhood.

As to the social status of the Bruni and many similar problems, much has been conjectured with no certainty achieved. It seems probable that the family was very far from being wealthy but had some claim to gentility. The Bruni may have been a branch of the noble family of that name at Asti.”


1 Berti, D. Loor. cit.

2 Florence, F. D'z

‘a logni Mori di G. B. Giorn.  
1882, fare. I 9, 44. Great circumspection is required in regard to this paper. In consulting the Registers, Florence somehow contrived to confuse the year 1545 with the year 1563! It should be read side by side with the monograph "Bruno e Nola" by Signor V. S. Pampinato, Castrowalla ri, 1899.

3 See the reference to II danese, etc., in Bruno's Spaccio, Dial. l., iij.

4

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE— BOYHOOD  
The child was christened Felipe (Philip). Perhaps his


Father named him after the heir to the throne of Charles V, as it was expected that he would become a loyal soldier. We shall see how he came by the name Giordano.

Gioan Bruno seemed to be a caustic critic of life; for his son tells us that when, after supper, a friend declared that "he had never before felt so happy," Gioan retorted: “That is because you have never before been so frivolous.” Probably Gioan was a man of parts; for it is accepted by most of the best authorities that he counted Tansillo, the Neapolitan poet, courtier, and cavalier, among his friends.

Tansillo, although not born at Nola, came from Nolan stock. He never stayed long at Nola but made a few hurried visits there. Felipe may have seen more of him later.


On this occasion, at Naples, many works show how deeply Tansillo impressed his mind during those formative years. He introduces the poet into his dialogues; he adopts Tansillo’s style in his own poems and often equals his master, though usually falls short of him in grace, smoothness, and elegance. He even incorporates a little of Tansillo’s work with his own. Any passing visit paid by Tansillo to Nola would produce a strong impression on the young lad, as the people around were of a different order.

In the cottages nearby dwelt certain members of his mother's family. He tells us about a certain Scipione Saulino (Bruno, *Geri ci Fari* [Dialogues I]). McIntyre, for example, accepts this account. See McIntyre, J[ournal].


L'onorevole Luigi Tansillo (1515–1568) was a favorite of Pedro de Toledo, Viceroy of Spain, and his son. He served as their companion both on land and at sea. Initially, he wrote with unbridled license, which incurred the displeasure of the Church. However, he later reconciled with the authorities and produced some excellent poetry, though it was often marred by many faults characteristic of the style then in fashion.

Before the Viceroy's death, Tansillo was appointed to a position in the Neapolitan Custom-House. See Rosalba G. Stuardi di letter., Napoli 1903, p. 166 ff.

Giordano Bruno is also mentioned for further reference.


Who went once a year, on Good Friday, to his crony, the curate, to confess. Absolution was freely given, and when the year came around again, Father would say, "today's sins finish up the year." Upon which the good priest would reply, "And so does today's absolation." Go in peace and sin no more.

The rustics of the neighborhood were a homespun people, rough and ready with a tongue sharp and full of caustic wit. They took the facts of life with unsophisticated directness and retained very ancient usages, celebrating the vintage with classic obscenity and shocking the Viceroy thereby.

Although degraded by centuries of misgovernment and oppression...

---


