Bruno also told an acquaintance, in 1585, that an Augustinian monk, whose name the hearer did not catch or did not remember, had been his main teacher in philosophy. It is noteworthy that in two of his works he calls the interlocutor who expresses his own opinions "Teofilo." Bruno claimed to be a “lover of God” himself; but it would be quite in his manner to discharge at the same time some sense of obligation to Teofilo da Varano, and Bruno was not one to be unmindful of the few. Cfr. Berti.


- Doc. 7/ij.
- Cfr. McIntrye op. cit., p. 121, note i.
- Destructio destructon nm Baldovini, gnas gna's de n destructora di olet; Neap., Mattheus, Cancre, I554.
- Auvray, L.; Mémoire de la Société impériale et centrale d'agriculture de Paris et des départements, t. xxi, pp. 288–299, no. Dec. 7.
- Gen Acansa.
- Triginta Signillorum exfictz cattz


zation in publishing, were extremely scarce. The invention of printing did not immediately lead to widespread availability of books.

Giordano Bruno tells us that when he was young, he studied the works on memory by Peter of Ravenna. Scholars of the Renaissance discovered how much ancient orators employed mnemonic techniques and studied Quintus Cornificius's mnemonics, which they and Bruno attributed to Cicero. They focused on this subject because a good memory was highly valued even after the invention of printing by type, as books remained rare due to underdeveloped publishing organizations.

It is clear that the young scholar received an impetus towards speculative thinking from Fra Teofilo. However, independent thinking had nearly ceased in Italy and most Protestant centers of learning. The contests between the Papacy and Reformers led to the vigorous enforcement of opposed dogmas throughout Europe. In Italy, the edicts of Trent were enforced under the protection of the neighboring Vatican. Bruno also mentions that as a boy he studied memory techniques from the works of Peter of Ravenna.


Zation in the book-trade was hard to come by and often had to be fetched from afar. Peter of Ravenna's *Phoenix* went through several editions. Cicero and all the older writers made use of visual memory, since that is stronger than auditory memory in most people, and taught how to imagine some vacant space, such as a temple, and fill it with suggestive images, thus using the principle of the association of ideas, which Aristotle had written about.

Later, Bruno interwove the mnemonics of Peter Ravenna's *Triginta sigla explicata* (also noted in C. Annibalis Canteri *Ciceronianus*) but P. Manutius, who published the Rhetorica and C. Herennianae at Venice in 1564, declared the authorship to be uncertain.


3. Foenum, Domini Per Ravernatius, memorie et magistri Veneti 1491.

Cfr. Middleton, A. E.; Memory Systems, Old and New. N.Y., 1888.

5. Aristotle, De Memoria et Reminiscentia, c. 2, 45, 16, 18, 45-2a, I4.

BIRTH AND PARENTAGE—BOYHOOD

Aristotle and other authors followed Cornificius closely, incorporating his psychological and metaphysical conclusions. His knowledge of the subject proved useful as an introduction and means of livelihood in city after city, especially in France and Germany, where much attention was given to the study of memory. Fresh books on memory were produced for each generation at least during the 16th century.

What career should he follow? Education was difficult to obtain and very expensive. The times were troubled. Neapolitans were beggared by heavy taxes imposed to suppress the Protestant revolt against Philip in the Low Countries, while the civil administration was abominable.


Police and even judges were corrupt; brigands infested  
the countryside, increasing the desolation brought about by earthquake, famine, and pestilence. What Bruno now witnessed or heard branded itself in his memory.

"If [Hydra] long for carrion," he said when in England, let him go stay in the Campagna or on the highway between Rome and Naples, where so many robbers are quartered; for there at every step he will have more sumptuous banquets of fresh flesh than in any other part of the world.

Even high society was infested by cheats and thieves; the kingdom was riddled with heresy, and heretics were pursued and exterminated with barbarous cruelty. Turkish buccaneers raided the coast, burning, slaying, and capturing women and children for the slave market.

The lad was in love with learning; he thought he had caught a glimpse of the high white star of Truth. 

1 Viede Allgemeine Encyclopaedia


---

**O Giordano Bruno**

Giordano Bruno found refuge in the cloister as a youth with limited means. The Church was very wealthy, owning two-thirds of the landed property in Naples. The order of Dominic the Spaniard was one of the most powerful and affluent monastic bodies, enjoying full support from Philip and his councilors.

In his fifteenth year—a time when it was impossible for Felipe to fully understand the nature and implications of monastic vows or the real spirit of the cloister—Bruno entered this Dominican Order. The first requirement of the order was intellectual submission.  

Mission. He would be trained by men who were called "Hounds of the Lord," whose special function was to uphold doctrine and to scent out heresy as dogs are employed to scent out truffles. This was the first of the long series of sardonic ironies which fate had provided for Felipe Bruno.

Dominicans, so-called from their founder, St. Dominic, on account of their Special work, were poked fun at in the famous line: "Domingicanes Evangelium latrant per totum Orbem."

