Inquisitorial functions were attached to this order of "Preaching Friars" rather more than ten years after St. Domingo's death, which took place A.D. 1221.

Giordano Bruno naturally impelled, putteth his mind into fetters, so that, from being free in manhood, he becometh a slave under most vile and subtle hypocrisy.

The reverberations of independent thought still lingered in Southern Italy; nor...


Perhaps, did convent walls wholly shut them out. He frankly told his judges at Venice that he "began to doubt the doctrine of Three distinct Persons in the Trinity from the age of eighteen; and indeed, Augustine declared the term Person to be new in his time; but I have never denied the dogma—only doubted." His acute and vigorous intellect was already at work, framing a philosophy, translating the Son as Intellect and the Holy Spirit as Love. He was naturally frank, and his incautious honesty soon landed him in difficulties.

"My master," he told the Inquisitors, "when I was a novice, in order to frighten me, drew up a process against me for having given away the images of St. Catherine of Sienna and possibly, St. Anthony, and retained a crucifix only whereby it was imputed to me that I despised the images of saints. Also for having told a novice, who was reading the account of "The Seven Joys Ofthe Madonna" in verse, that he should cast it aside and read some other book instead, such as the "Lives Ofthe Holy Fathers"; but my master tore this document up the same day.

4 The stricter discipline ordered by the Council of Trent had not yet taken effect in the monastery; and so little cause for offense did the fathers find in Bruno (who was a close student, and whose converse was probably chiefly with books) that he became subdeacon and deacon in due course and was admitted to the priesthood in 1572, he being then 24 years of age.

5 Before he became a priest, he had the confidence and...


**Monastic Life at Naples**

1. Eroi ci farori, P.J., Dial., after 1st edition.
2. Doc. x i.
3. [Bid Doc. xxiii.
5. Bertì, D., Vita di G.B., ed. of 1868, p. 72, n. 1.

MONASTIC LIFE AT NAPLES

Boldness, not merely to write a satiric allegory, for which he chose the title of Noah’s Ark” (there being a work of devotional mysticism by Hugo de Sancto Victore bearing the same name), but also to dedicate it to Pope Pius V, who then wore the tiara; and he presented it to him, probably when he was summoned to Rome. For, the monks could not fail to…


Talk about the brilliant man they had secured. Bruno had devoted some attention to mnemonics, and his reputation reached the Papal Court. Later, an acquaintance in Paris entered in his diary: “Jordanus told me that Pope Pius V and Cardinal Rebiba summoned him from Naples and he was brought to Rome in a coach to set forth his Artificial Memory. He recited the Psalm Fundamenta 3 in Hebrew, and taught something of this to Rebiba.”

“Noah's Ark,” the first fruit of his genius, has disappeared. We know that he crowded the ark with all manner of things.


Of creatures, each probably symbolizing some human virtue or folly. The animals struggled for the seat of honor—the poop—a current metaphor for the faculty of Reason; the gods granted the distinction to the ass; but he ran some danger of losing it because his was a case of hoofs, not horns.

The gist of this early work may be preserved in two later books, but not even the temerity of Bruno could have submitted the audacities of one of these to the severe scrutiny of Michele Ghislieri. Berti and others think that Bruno’s comedy "The Chandler" was mentioned by McIntrye (op. cit., f. 11), Cena, Dial. I; Cabala, Essay. Dedication. Auvray, Loemceit, sub Dec. 21. Cena, Dial. I.


Can't be clearer: The Call of the Cavalry of Pegasus. 

Caos with the addition of an ancient syllable.

Pius V died in 1572, the year in which Bruno became a priest.

IV - GIORDANO BRUNO

Written, although not revised and finished, during this monastic period. 

Bruno says: Being at the time at a monastery of my order, called St. Bartholomew, in the city of Campagna, some distance from Naples but still within the Kingdom, I chanted my first mass there. I continued to wear the Dominican habit, celebrating mass and divine offices under obedience to my superiors and the Priors of monasteries wherever I was, up until the year 1576.

Doubtless he diligently searched through the library of every religious house in which he was a temporary inmate. He could have found but little else.


In common with his monkish associates, except that some of them possessed a tincture of learning on which "the Angelic Doctor," who cast distinction on their order, had set his seal. Even candid, courageous Sarpi tells us that he found himself compelled to wear a mask.

Bruno’s disguise was very penetrable. The habit concealed a fierce intellectual flame: it had burst forth once; it could not but show itself again—"the cowl does not make the monk."

Here was a man of vast spiritual energy and singularly open character, one not to be scared by legend or suppressed by authority, resolute to know at first hand, strong-headed if not headstrong, and brave to rashness. Soon the monks...


