Of St. Dominic had a taste of the essence of their young priest. Now that he was in full orders and therefore less under direction, he indulged in a frankness of speech which speedily brought him into serious peril. At this time, Arianism had found foothold in the South, and many had departed from “the fixed highway to the Infinite and Eternal.” Bruno told the Inquisitors:

“One day, during a discussion with Montalcino, one of our order, in the company of other fathers, he said that heretics were ignorant folk and used no scholastic terms; whereto I replied that indeed they did not set forth their conclusions in the scholastic manner; but they came to the point, as did the fathers of the Church.” And then Bruno proceeded to show, as an example.


That Arius was not without some kind of support from St. Augustine:

1. “I showed that the view of Arius is less dangerous than it was commonly taken to be; for it was generally understood that Arius meant to teach that the Word was the first creation of the Father. I explained that Arius said the Word was neither Creator nor Created, but an intermediary between the Creator and the creature, just as the spoken word is an intermediary between the speaker and the meaning he sets forth. And for this reason, it is called the First-born before all creatures; through which, and not out of which, all things are—not to which, but through which all things return to their final end, which is the Father.”

2. It is unfortunate that the Founder of Christianity and His Apostles were as silent about such high matters as if they had been agnostics, while the Fathers gave vague and contradictory answers to


Those important questions which the Roman Church had by this time definitely and precisely answered with one theological scheme, the Eastern Church with another, those unsuccessful disturbers of Christian peace, the earlier heretics with more, and the Protestants with several new ones. Bruno, who had read the Christian fathers and the Schoolmen carefully, was in the right; and Montalcino appears to have reported the conversation at headquarters.

This was not the sole charge against Bruno. "The Provincial drew up a process against me on certain charges of which I remain wholly ignorant; but I was told that he was proceeding against me for fresh heresy, and was reviving the affair of my novitiate; and I myself doubted it."  

1 Doc. xi ii  
2 Doc. xi 16 GIORDANO BRUNO


Should find myself in prison. Bruno was no longer in the hands of the Director of Novitiates but, as a priest, answerable to the Provincial Father. A charge of heresy, therefore, might be fraught with very serious consequences. The Papal States, which adjoined the Kingdom, were the only possible refuge. So, he continues, "I left Naples and went to Rome," thus commencing a life of turmoil and ceaseless wandering through Europe, which was to endure for sixteen years, to be followed by nearly eight years of imprisonment, and to end at the stake.

Discipline of Books

1. Classics, Aristotle, The Schoolmen, etc.

Bruno must have been a marvel of intellectual industry. Interested in all things, burning to know, he must have put every spare moment at the monastery to good purpose for his education was vast and varied. A good memory helped him, though sometimes one finds it lacking.


Like the equally excellent memory of Macaulay, a trifle inaccurate; certainly he owed more to nature than to the systematic mnemonic art in which he believed. He spoke Spanish like all the cultivated people of the kingdom. Latin, of course, was a living language spoken by every educated monk and scholar. Bruno’s works give evidence of a wide range of reading in the Roman classics and contain many quotations from the Roman poets, especially from Lucretius, Virgil, and Ovid. But his eager, romantic mind did not allow him to be molded by such studies into classic reserve and equipoise. He acquired an intimate acquaintance with the literature of that graceful, unlaboured daughter of Latin—his own tongue; he commanded the great poets Dante, Ariosto, and Tasso.


References and quotations in his works show that he especially valued the sugared conceits and strained manner of Tansillo and the decadent Neapolitan school. The one play he wrote indicates a study of Bibbiena and Aretino, as well as Plautus and Terence. He knew Greek and demonstrated a mastery of Aristotle in "Cena," Dial. II. Giordano Bruno was part of a Dominican education, for Albertus Magnus and Aquinas had secured the Church's acceptance of the Stagirite as “topmost authority,” “worthiest of faith and obedience.” Petrarch.


Indeed, some dared to say that, after all, Aristotle was only a man. Recently, Cornelius Agrippa, who lived and died in the bosom of Mother Church, had attacked Aristotle; so had Ramus and others. But all recent onslaughts on Aristotle's authority were regarded as inroads on orthodox belief. Not merely did Bruno possess a masterly knowledge of Aristotle, but by reason of his bent towards natural science, he made close acquaintance with the chief classical and Arabian commentators. Translations of the latter had been published not long before. At first, he accepted the cosmology of this most logical and comprehensive of thinkers; and certainly Aristotle's teaching would impress on him the need for attentive observation, which that master did not always carry out. The more observant scholars of the sixteenth century were aware that men do not have more teeth than women.


2 or two more sutures  
in the brain-pan;  
3  
that they have more than sixteen ribs,  
and that the back of the cranium is not an empty space.  
5  
When Bruno studied Copernicus he came to regard the  
Stagirite as a clog to human progress. Unlike Aristotle,  
he cannot be charged with “moderation to excess”: but accused that  
“master of those who know” 6 of relying on his own invention more than on fact and of being a  
desiccated sophisticator of truth, perhaps instigated by unworthy motives.  
7  
Imbedded in Aristotle’s writings, Bruno  

Dante Contrapasso to,


In 6.2, Aristotle's "History of Animals," Z, 3, 501c, 19.

3 [Matthew], 8:491e, 2

4 [Matthew], 15:493f, 14
