Sig. P.I., § 32.  
Enn., iii, ii, 18.  
— Bruno, Sig. P.I., § 3^2' Enn., in, iv, 36.  
— Bruno, De Umbris. In T.VII Eroici, passim.  
Enn., iii, vi, 4; iii, iii, 21; iv, v.  
— Bruno, De Umb., Gen. 71;  
Causa, Dial. II De Simplici Minimo.


I  
5 Enn.  
—Bruno, De Immenso, Cap. x.  
3 De Imag. Comp., Cap. i n.  
7 Aristotle; De Anima, I, 25. -Cicero, De Natura Deorum, I, 10.  
Vindelband, W History Phil., tr. Tufts, London, 1896, n. 219.

DISCIPLINE OF BOOKS 25

Plotinus writes of this emotional and mystical union wherein there is absorption in sublime tranquillity.


Thought is still a subject of exploration. He says there is "a flight from the alone to the alone." The soul suddenly becomes pure intellect, but after intellectual discipline. Bruno accepted such experiences as miracles of faith; however, he believed that one may, by strenuous effort and through the study and contemplation of nature, penetrate lower shades and reach rapturous light.

But such illumination is rational in contrast to the alogical illumination of the pure mystic. Through translations or more directly, Bruno became acquainted with Philo Judaeus, Porphyry, Iamblichus, the pseudo-Orpheus, the pseudo-Hermes, and other masters of the Alexandrian school. These authors were deeply influential.


1 Porphyrius; De Vita Platonis.  
2 Ennius, Ouvres complètes, vol. 7.  
3 Cabala, Dial. I Eroici, Parte I, Dial. II; Parte II, Dial. II.

All my studies, whatever their country, period, or religion, seem to agree as to the main characteristics of their experience. Self-consciousness ceases; the subject of the experience feels himself lifted out of self and thought. To some, this beatific vision would seem to come suddenly; to others, only after preparation. The condition is less rare than supposed; it is most frequent in people of very high mental endowment and practical common sense.

These excellent witnesses all declare that intellectual activity disappears and is replaced by a single emotion, a feeling of oneness with the Absolute. Tennyson frequently experienced something of this kind; he speaks of it as a waking trance, which would come upon him from boyhood up when he was alone and which he could frequently bring on by repeating his own name.

All at once as if out of the intensity of the consciousness of individuality, the individuality itself seemed to dissolve and fade away into boundlessness.


Being in a state not confused but clear beyond words; when death seemed almost laughable, with personal loss appearing not an extinction but true life. It seems there is a far-off approach to this condition experienced by a few exceptional people during the administration of aesthetics, yet no psychologists, mental pathologists, or specialists in hypnotism have given it much attention.

26 GIORDANO BRUNO

Permeated by the Pythagorean doctrine of the mystical nature of numbers, this fascinated Bruno, who was instructed in the mathematics of his time. Iamblichus and other Neo-Platonic writers had a strong drift towards the occult, with which the Neo-Platonists sympathized deeply. Pico della Mirandola exhibited a craze for the Cabala—a curious collection of rabbinistic mysticism that emerged in the ninth and thirteenth centuries. From sources like Pico, Bruno absorbed what these writers conceived they knew of Chaldea, Assyria, Persia, India, and Egypt's lore.


Little or no idea of the historical development of thought existed. Every man dragged in each and every writer who could be supposed to support his own convictions and would quote them all as having equal authoritative value. Moreover, as in the time of Dante, natural facts and even words were held to contain symbolic significance and to be adumbrations and indices of truth. Bruno did not escape from these intellectual habits, which were universal. He drew much mystical lore from Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa of Nettesheim (1486–1535). Agrippa’s work on the “Vanity of Human Knowledge” led him to take an ironic interest in absurdity.

III. RAYMOND LUCAIN

In early youth, Bruno began the study of one whom he calls "an untutored hermit, filled with divine genius—one who," so he thought, "built wiser than he knew."


Raymond Lully of Minorca (1235), known as "the Enlightened Doctor," was a contemporary of Duns Scotus. His work is referenced alongside H. C. Agrippa's *De occulta philosophia* and Brunetto Latini's works such as *Il Tesoretto*. Giordano Bruno also engaged with Lully's ideas.

Lully outlined objects of knowledge he deemed indisputable and universally accepted, along with the methods by which our intelligence operates. He then presented these concepts in a circle known as "the key to discovery," comprising nine fundamental questions.


Tensions which may be asked are considered within a fixed circle. Within this circle, there are five other concentric circles that can revolve independently from each other, and each is divided into nine compartments. By following given rules of simple character, the middle term of any syllogism was held to be discoverable. For speed in working, the circles and their compartments were indicated by symbols. Bruno saw in this art the germs of that complete and symbolic logic at which Lully aimed; a vision which also aroused the hope of Leibniz and occupied much attention during the last quarter of the last century. He found it invaluable for the purposes of artificial memory, and the first and last of his printed works, as well as many volumes in between, are devoted to improvements in Lullism. His mastery of the “Enlightened Doctor” proved useful to him as an introduction to scholars and seats of learning.

IV. CUSANUS  
Cusanus (Nicolaus Chrypffs of Cues)
