

1401: The son of a fisherman on the Mosel became a cardinal and the close friend of Enea Silvio (Pius II). One of the most remarkable men of his age, he was the earliest of those speculative dogmatists who lie midway between Scholasticism and Critical Philosophy. Bruno owed to this remarkable mind his own strongest philosophical impulse and many views; he speaks of Cusanus as “divine” and a “great discoverer.”

Cusanus, as became a bold and independent thinker, tried to rationalize theology and made more than one attempt to expound the Trinity as three abstracted aspects of God and His universe, which are one. He held that sense-impressions are united in the activity of thought; yet knowledge at its best and highest is merely an image of being; and therefore can only approximate towards, and can never be identical with Reality. At best,


Knowledge is like a polygon, which, while remaining a composite figure, can never become a circle. Cusanus declared the relativity of all knowledge; but by intuition, men can rise above antinomies and hold contraries together in unity. When we do this, we are doing, in our finite measure, what God does. By this doctrine of intuition, Cusanus saves himself from skepticism.

Yet though he is content to utter "O altitudo," and finds God comprehensible, he declares Him to be all things and that He could not be other than He is. This gave rise to accusations of pantheism. The negation of greater imperfection, says Cusanus, is nearer truth than the negation of higher attributes. In other words, there are degrees in truth and reality.

The universe is the unfolding of what, in Deity, is unity; just as a line is the unfolding of a point. If we...


Reflecting on this, we shall find that to a true maximum nothing can  
1. The indebtedness of B. to Cusanus is exaggerated by F.J. Clements in his *G.B. v. Gusa*, Bonn, 1847; but, in spite of its prejudice, this remains an invaluable work.

Sfacciato, I, at beginning; Infinito, III Oration. Valde,  
Cusanus, *De docta ignorantia*, i, 7; ii, 7; Alcizoran, 6, 7, 8 De  
Fiorest.

“Cusanus, *De docta ignoranta*. 

5 “I love to lose myself in a mystery, to pursue my Reason to an  
Altitude,” Sir T. Browne, *Religio Medici*.

3 Cf. the modern view of Bradley, *Appearance and Reality*, c. xxiv.

30 GIORDANO BRUNO  

Be added; from a true minimum nothing can be taken away. Man can perceive therefore that.


In Ultimate Reality, maximum and minimum coincide.

1. The universe is boundless in space and time, and the center of the universe is precisely where the observer stands within it. This doctrine greatly influenced Bruno. Nature is animate and articulated; everything acts as a more or less imperfect mirror of the universe in its own place, maintaining itself in relation to and community with other things.

2. In conscious experience, there is indivisible continuity; however, in things, there is an indivisible minimum.

3. All these views of Cusanus reappear in Bruno, often enlarged and enriched. Cusanus' teaching that reason unfolds itself in numbers strengthened Bruno’s Pythagorean tendency. The German philosopher saw that the universe can, at least in part, be explained scientifically through the application of mathematics to the...


Results of observation; and Bruno is his eager pupil. It was probably the study of Cusanus which set him on the track of the infinity of the universe with innumerable worlds and the interpenetration of everything in the whole.

There was as yet no really philosophical or scientific method: only an eager questioning of experience; but Cusanus made the first attempt since the days of Greek science to explain the universe on scientific principles. He foreshadowed the law of inertia, and declared, in 1436, that the earth is in motion.

1 Cusanus  
   - De docta ignorantia; De sapientia libri tres.
   - Fr. Bruno De tribus maximis circumferentibus.

2 Cusanus; De ludo globi.

3 Cusanus; De docta ignota, iij. Cf. Bruno; De triplici minimo.

4 Cusanus; De coniecturis; De visione Dei. Cf. Bruno, De monade.

5 Clemens, F. J.; op. cit., up. 142, 143.


**3 Cusanus der Epurationi Calendarii. DISCIPLINE OF BOOKS 3**
