The presence of a wandering monk would excite little surprise in most places. It was quite usual to encounter such travelers who might wish to visit libraries or find the atmosphere of their monastery uncongenial. However, a monk in this abode of the saintly elect could not fail to attract attention, although Catholic princes sometimes passed through the city and even visited the most distinguished of the exiles—the Neapolitan Galeazzo Caracciolo, marquis of Vico and nephew of Pope Paul IV. Di Vico had forsaken wife and children for faith's sake and had been regarded by Calvin as a pillar of the church.

References:  
- Bolsec, H. *History de la vie etc. de Calvin*, Lyons, 1577.  
- Bonnet, J. *Lettres françaises dej.* C, Paris 1854.  
- Roget, A; *Histoire du peuple de Genève* etc., 1870-83.  
- Brunner, K. III. *Servetus*, Berlin.


---

1,865.  
— *Rielli et al., A Relation du procès contre S.*, Geneva, 1844.

It will be observed that Bruno retains his baptismal name in the Protestant city of Geneva while remaining a Catholic. However, I have kept other condemned works by authors like Raymond Lully and others who treat philosophical matters. I scorn both them and their doctrines.

On his arrival at Geneva, before he knew much about Calvinistic administration, Bruno may have considered joining the Reformed Church. John Vincent told Cotin (if the diarist were he), rather more than six years later, that "Jordanus said to the Genevese he would have attached himself to their religion had they not so dishonoured him."  


Probably Vincent got this on hearsay; but it is likely to be true. We shall deal with the “dishonor” directly. Bruno did not vex himself overmuch with the vain disputes of theology. He conceived it to be his business to try to get at the truth of Nature by reason, and he confessed to his judges that he was no theological expert.

But theology can be undermined by philosophy and physical science. Bruno's intrepid zeal for truth landed him in difficulties when little more than two months had elapsed from his arrival in Geneva. One of the evangelical shepherds of the city was Antoine de la Faye of Chateaudun, a man who had taken his medical degree at Padua five years before and was a refugee.

Most likely Aristotle was the subject of dispute. How long Bruno continued to accept the authority of Aristotle, we do not know; but he came after much thought to perceive the errors in his Cosmology and Physics.

Ever a fighter, a valiant knight-errant of Truth, he was as impulsive and imprudent as courageous.


Rebellion against accepted views is always strangely limited in its extent. The governing body of the Genevans retained some prejudices from their forefathers; they regarded Aristotle as hardly less authoritative than Holy Writ. Théodore de Bèze told Pierre de la Ramée that they had resolved not to depart one jot or tittle from the judgments of Aristotle. Among those who supported this decision was de La Faye, who, just now, was present.  

**At Geneva, Lyon, and Toulouse 45**

1. Doc. xi.
2. Auvray, loc. cit., sub 15 Mar. 1856.
3. 'Haag, Eugène et Émile; La France Protestante, 1846-59, t. IV, pp. 185, 186.
4. Bruno; Infinito, Dial. I.

At Geneva, Lyons, and Toulouse.


Lecturing at the Academy on Philosophy:

If a passage in Genevan records suggests it was Aristotle that Bruno attacked through de la Faye, he began a conflict at Geneva which occupied the best years of his rebellious life—a determined and persistent effort to upheave the dead weight of obsolete authority and give freedom to the human spirit once again. He felt, to use the language of Bacon, that the ancient cosmology was "no match for the subtlety of Nature."

The consistency of theologians sat watchful for the slightest offense against the stringent moral and theological code they chose to institute.

On Thursday, August 6, 1579, we find Bruno and one Jean Bergeon laid by the heels. It is recorded in the Registers of the Consistory that Bruno had...


Caused Bergeon to print certain objections and invectives against M. de la Faye, reckoning twenty blunders in one of his lectures. (The twenty blunders became multiplied by five in Parisian gossip.) It was resolved that he should be examined after dinner. Then Jean Bergeon pleaded that the Italian had persuaded him of the wholly philosophical bearing of the matter. He was given a day's imprisonment and fined 50 florins.

The next day, Bergeon sent up a petition asking the Council to pardon his transgression. He had been led astray by the monk, who affirmed there was nothing in it against God.

1 Bacon; Nov. Org., xii.
2 Fairbairn, A.; Camb. Mod. Hist., II, 368.
3 Auvray, Lop. cit., sub 20 May.


1 5 56.  
46 GIORDANO BRUNO
