
The fine was reduced by half due to his small means. Bruno seems to have been visited in his cell by pastors and one Michael Varro, a lawyer who dabbled in mathematics and natural science and had written on motion. The lawyer's hobby strengthens the surmise that the quarrel arose about Aristotle. Bruno acknowledged that he had offended.

The council sat again on Monday, 10th August, and decided that he should be set free, but he must beg pardon of God, the law, and the insulted professor; he must acknowledge his offense before the Consistory and tear up the libel. So, on the 13th August, he appeared as required before the Consistory to acknowledge his transgression in that he had erred in doctrine and called the pastors of the Church of Geneva pedagogues. But a sur...


Prise awaited the good pastors. He would "neither excuse himself nor plead guilty, for the matter had not been truly reported." He believed the story came from Pastor Antoine de la Faye.

Asked whom he called pedagogues, he made many excuses and assertions that he was persecuted, setting forth conjectures and fresh accusations but nevertheless admitted he was there to own his misconduct in traducing the pastors. Was admonished to follow the true doctrine. Said he was ready to receive censure. Seeing that he calumniated the said de la Faye and accused him of saying something which he did not say, and had no wish to repent his doings but urged that "he had done right," it is recommended that he shall make a complete apology and acknowledge his transgression; otherwise, he be forbidden the sacrament and be brought up again before the governing board, who are entreated not to endure this kind of person—one who disturbs.


The school, and those who shall immediately be compelled to acknowledge their offense. Replied, that he repented of his offense, would amend his speech, and further admitted having calumniated Pastor de la Faye. The said remonstrances at Geneva, Lyons, and Toulouse were made, and he was sent away with a reprimand.

On Thursday, August 27, Philippe Brun, a student residing in this city, requested the sacrament which had been forbidden him, acknowledging that he had greatly offended. It was decided that he should be thoroughly reprimanded and allowed to partake of the sacrament. The said reprimand freed him from his transgression; for which he humbly rendered thanks.

These entries in the Genevese Register would seem, at first sight, to prove that Bruno conformed to a regulation of the City whereby students were compelled to sign the...


**Calvinistic Confession of Faith**

It has been shown, however, that this regulation, framed in 1559, ceased to be enforced in 1576. After the latter date, only membership of the community was required; and Bruno fulfilled this condition by attending the Italian Evangelical Church. The sentence of exclusion from the sacraments would appear to have been merely formal—one that we find repeated at Helmstadt a few years later on a similar occasion. It does not necessarily imply that Bruno was ever a communicant. But it would carry with it the stigma of heresy and be productive of highly inconvenient, if not serious, consequences.

When on trial for his life, he gave an open and manly account of his career and opinions. It is true that here and there he slides over a fact capable of being turned against him; now and then he puts a little theological whitewash, as the times required, on his opinions. But any unprejudiced...


Reader must regard his statement, taken as a whole, as being a model of plain and straightforward declaration. In it, we find him saying:

“I often went to hear heretics preach or dispute [in Protestant countries] more out of curiosity about their ways than because I found them inviting; nor did I have any satisfaction. So that after the reading or sermon, when the time came for the sacrament and the distribution of bread in their style, I would go about my business. I have never taken the sacrament or observed their practices.”

The inquisitors pointed out that the statement was hardly credible since by non-compliance he would make enemies.


a clearer picture of Bruno's position than in the words with which he concluded his address to the Parisian Parliament. "Wherein I have transgressed, I have told the truth. Herein I did not sin, and it shall never be found of me. Moreover, in these heretical lands, Catholics are always to be met with who do not observe their usages."

An Italian diarist writes: "John Vincent says that Jordanus paid penalty on his knees at Geneva for calumniating M. de la Faye, a doctor of medicine from Padua, and printing a sheet containing 100 blunders committed by La Faye in a single lesson. Then Jordanus said he would have attached himself to their religion had they not so dishonoured him. The said de la Faye is preaching at the present time."

Bruno had been kindly received by the Italian reformers at Geneva; he had been ill-treated by his own Church; he had achieved by this time his own esoteric interpretation of Christianity, and he would gladly have united himself with a truly liberal Church. Indeed, one could hardly get


Daily bread on any other terms than joining the dominant Church of a place, whether Roman or Protestant. As to the sacrament, that would present no insurmountable difficulty if he were once sure of the sincerity and benevolent wisdom of the religious community administering it. He did not dabble in theological niceties. Peter and Paul, he said, had no knowledge of subtleties; they only knew that "this is my"
1 Doc. xij.  
2 Auvray, L.; op. cit., sub Mar. zoth 1586. De la Faye became Rector of the Academy in 1580 and later held the chair of Philosophy. Prof. McIntyre says of Bruno's antagonist that "his one title to fame is that he was the biographer of Beza." 

AT GENEVA, LYONS AND TOULOUSE E 49


Bruno accepted the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation but interpreted it in his own way within his philosophy: he believed that the whole universe is an eternal transformation of the World-Soul, the Divine Word, and the ever-present Absolute. He mocked the fuss people made over the "mysteries of Ceres and Bacchus." Bruno was not a man to submit to the narrow yoke of acrid Calvinism. However, ecclesiastical despotism in Geneva had prohibited the sacrament, prompting him to remonstrate—not against the formal sentence itself, but against its implications. He requested that it be withdrawn, likely because there would otherwise have been no sustenance for him from printers or the incensed Italian Community. Henceforth, he had no leanings toward Calvinism.

Once, during a meticulous theological tiff, ...


Calvin himself was exiled with the polite intimation that "the gates of the city were open." They were still unclosed to dissenters.

"Having been told," says Bruno, "that I could not stay if I did not bring my mind to accept the religion of that city, and besides having received no aid from them, I determined to leave, and I journeyed to Lyons, where I stayed a month. But not finding the wherewithal for my daily bread and necessities, I went on to Toulouse."

There was an Italian colony at Lyons, chiefly composed of emigrants from Lucca. There were also several famous printing presses which turned out more books every year than Paris could boast of. Such men as Doletus and Henricus Stephanus were associated with these activities. Cfr. Doc. 117°


— Tocco, F.; Nuova Antologia, 4° ser., CI, Sept. 1902 — Archives of the Inquisition, vol. 1482–1600 A.D., fol. 1379, 80, 81. — Sziglus Sigillorum, "De Gerezei Baccobo crudelitates"; De Immenso; Spacio, III, i, ii.  
Document x.  
