50 GIORDANO BRUNO  

Bruno and Servetus had earned their living there by reading proofs. So Bruno had good reason to hope for the success he failed to obtain there. Toulouse was a bulwark of orthodoxy and one of the most intolerant cities in France. The university boasted its students, most of them following the law courses.


For which Toulouse had acquired particular fame. Petrarch had studied law there, and Lully had taught there. The Dominicans had a monastery in the city, where lay the bones of Aquinas; but we may be sure that Bruno did not seek hospitality at a place which, for the memories it aroused, presented so much interest to him. That easy charm of the children of the south, so attractive and ingratiating, must have been his, for here, as in every new place throughout his life, he speedily made acquaintances. He began to enjoy brighter days than had fallen to his lot during the past three years. He was asked to "read the Sphere with certain students," and continued to do this and teach philosophy for about six months. His sympathies were with the concrete organic life of Catholicism, and not at all with the atomic individualism of the Protestants and that tendency toward social and moral disruption which was already apparent among them. Geneva had cured him of all illusion on that score. Until he was seized by the Officers of the Inquisition, he could never understand that the belief of the Roman Church was expressed in other than...


"Language of accommodation," and that truly instructed and wise Catholics would prefer rigid and incomprehensible dogma to his own esoteric and rationalized explanation. Bruno felt as might an ancient Greek exile, a homeless wanderer from his own city, which meant more than home to him, and deprived of the civic rights.

Bartholmess, C. B., t I, p. 68; Berti op. cit., p. 106.  
Doc. ix.  
5  
2 GIORDANO BRUNO  

It is easy to see how it arose. The diarist gives clear evidence that he did not catch or remember everything Bruno told him, and it was Bruno's habit to call himself a "doctor in Roman theology." "The theses for his doctorate," the diarist continues, were "Whatever St..."


Thomas says in his summary against the Gentiles that whatever the Master of Sentences (St. Peter Lombard) says is true. He ranks St. Thomas above all in his *Summa* and Disputed Questions.

Armed with his degree, Bruno entered into the contest for the chair. In those days, as still for the Rectorship of our Scottish Universities, the election lay with the students; it had done so from the first beginnings of universities. He must have gained a considerable reputation through his private lessons, for the choice fell on him.

“I presented myself to the meeting and was appointed and approved, and gave instruction on Aristotle’s *De Anima* and other philosophical subjects.” This text-book would give him an opportunity of treating a popular subject in his own original way. The nature and destiny of the soul...


Had been eagerly debated for a century, with all the inevitable rancor and vituperation which attend on disputation without real knowledge. Probably the new professor, whose zeal and courage—in the end, always got the better of his modicum of tact—contrived to arouse bitter opposition. He could hardly have avoided expounding the germs of the philosophy that was shaping itself in his mind; and there was plenty to offend therein. In the manuscript of his evidence at the Venetian trial, a passage which runs:

“But in certain disputable points which I gave forth, and proposed conclusions is cancelled.”

He inscribed himself in the roll of students of the Protestant University of Marburg on July 25, 1586, as Jordanus Nolanus Neapolitanus Theologise Doctor Romanen sis.

AT GENEVA, LYONS AND TOULOUSE 53


1. This points to some opposition, and elsewhere Bruno wrote of the rowdy behavior of students towards him in Toulouse, Paris, and Oxford.

2. At the two last-named universities, we know that his attacks on Aristotle aroused violent resentment. Little freedom of thought was allowed at Toulouse during times when France was distracted by factional conflict, with Catholics and Huguenots fighting each other. During the year which saw Bruno's arrival in the city and the first complete year of his stay there (1579–80), the Huguenots made more than forty attacks on neighboring towns.

   The passage referring to disputes in the school having been canceled, Bruno continues: “I left because of the civil wars and went on to Paris.”

3. A very excellent reason; but did it stand alone?


He would seem to have employed his time in Toulouse, when he was not teaching, in writing a big book on the Lullian method and artificial memory which he entitled "Clavis Magna" ("The Great Key"). He conceived that he had included and systematized in it all the theories and practical devices of previous writers on these subjects, presenting them in complete philosophic form. The work was never published, although Bruno frequently refers to it in his earlier writings. However, there is little doubt that parts of it were the bases of his "Seal of Seals" and "Combinatory Lamp." 

1 Doc. ix.  
2 J. Bruno Oratio Valdicatoria.  
3 Doc. ix.  
4 McIntrye; op. cit., p. 17.  
5 De Lampade Combinatoria Lulliana. Est Et Una Nica Clavis.


**Chapter VI  
First Stay in Paris**

There was relative peace in France. The seventh of a series of monstrous wars had been ended by a patched-up agreement. Wrecked cities and unpeopled villages, burnt farms, and fields laid waste bore witness everywhere to the fury of faction and the malevolent rancor of opponents who disguised personal hatred under the convenient mask of religion. From the disappearance of tolerant classic paganism, the unformulated aspirations or discontent of races and classes found in this or that religious creed a suitable rallying cry; and now the opposed forces which made for liberty on one hand and for the compact state on the other set up their separate religious banners.

All the scoundrels in France gathered round one or the other of these; they dubbed themselves Catholic or Huguenot. All, that was atavistic in human nature was aroused.


