and all the vilest and most primitive passions were set loose. "Pick me out," wrote Montaigne, "pick me out from the Catholic army all the men who are actuated either by a pure zeal for religion or by loyalty to their country, and you will not find enough to form one single company." Everywhere poverty, hunger, suffering, and disease were the results of these wars. Bruno journeyed to Paris through provinces marked by scath and bale. All the way, to use the words of Castelnau, was "one long bleeding wound."

Bruno crystallizes his experience in three significant phrases: "the French uproar," "the French fury," and "the bloody Seine." The best of the sons of France—men of broad mind and dignified character, brilliant scholars, and original thinkers—had, for the most part, been slaughtered or exiled. Montaigne retired to the remote home of his ancestors; he


It speaks of it as the only chateau in France which had no guard or sentinel but the stars.

The Gallic fury, which had been let loose on Italy and brought ruin there, was now expending itself at home. Yet the invaders brought back a novel appreciation of letters and refinement, coupled with a far greater appreciation of luxury. When the descendant of Florentine pawnbrokers became the mother of French kings, fashion aped the superior civilization of Italy; and in this way Italy came to exercise an enduring influence on the quick aptitude of France.

The slaughter of St. Bartholomew's Day had not wholly extinguished the torch of the Renaissance which French hands had snatched up: it still burned brightly in literature and art; and Frenchmen showed their innate genius for history, memoirs, and the essay. Montaigne had just published the first two books of his immortal work.

A group of French humanists, although unpossessed by passion and unendowed with originality, aimed at a rich...


Vocabulary and a splendid style. They took the later Italian literature as their example, and although stricken in years, most of them were still living. French artists and architects still imitated Italian models, breathing into their copies a grace and refinement which is peculiarly Gallic. At Court, the Queen Mother and her Italian followers were copied with such absurd detail that it changed permanently the very pronunciation of the language; the French "r" was flattened by fashion into an "l". In spite of the terrible and protracted strife throughout the land, all manner of Italians from each little State came pouring over the mountains to find their El Dorado at the French Court or in French cities.


They were cordially welcomed. Paris was chiefly a mass of miserable hovels. The luxury of the Court contrasted strangely with the squalor of the streets; the ignorant noble, caring for nothing but warfare, horsemanship, and sport, implied the familiar beggar. Even the priests besought alms as they paraded the streets with open missals.

Yet Italian traders did well. Italian astrologers and actors, teachers of horsemanship and fencing-masters, doctors, and scholars found a temporary or permanent home in France. The pulpits were filled by Italian preachers, and eager ears drank in draughts of eloquence in Italianised French. Italian professors were appointed to vacant chairs at the seats of learning. Small wonder that Bruno cast his eyes on Paris!

Moreover, the University, although it was no longer mistress of theological thought or arbitress in philosophy, maintained its schools, which were now badly attended.


Having secured some measure of her ancient prestige, Bruno—now calling himself by his monkish name Giordano again—arrived in Paris towards the end of 1581. It was common for scholars to wander from place to place and fight their way into office by securing popularity or influence. He says:

“When I went to Paris to get myself known and my measure taken, I gave thirty expositions on the Thirty Divine Attributes, taken from the first part of [the Summa Theologica of] St. Thomas.”

I have always admired Catholic theologians, particularly St. Thomas, whose works I have always kept at hand, perused, and studied.

First Stay in Paris 57


Praised. I have them still and hold them dear.

The Angelic Doctor, as the accepted exponent of Catholic philosophy, was no less highly rated by the professors and students of Paris. Humanism had never taken deep root in the University, and after the massacre of 1572, true scholarship languished while Catholic studies triumphed. What choice of subject could have been a happier one!

Bruno’s disquisitions were so successful that he remained in Paris, lecturing on mnemonics and the art of Lully as improved by himself, incorporating the germs of his own philosophical views. He was a stimulating teacher, full of fire and originality. He would dictate with great rapidity while standing on one leg. He could be persuasive and convincing; often he became provocative and tactless. His pupils say that he was marvellously ready in thought and speech; he could deal with any subject that turned up. Often he employed a barbarous Latin jargon, but at times he would become truly eloquent. Sometimes he would carry his hearers away with him, and his lecture room was packed.


His desire "to get known and have his measure taken was achieved; he was offered a chair at the University." Unable to accept an ordinary professorship since, unlike the University of Toulouse, that of Paris made attendance at Mass obligatory, which, says Bruno, I always avoided doing, having left my order and cast off my habit. I continued my teaching.

His reputation reached the Court. "I got me such a name that King Henry III summoned me one day to discover from me if the memory I possessed was natural or acquired by magic art. I satisfied him that it did not come from sorcery but from organized effort." 

References:
1. Doc. xi
2. Nostitz, J. Artificium Aristotelico-Lullianum Brega, 1615. — Eglin, R.; J.B. Summa Terminorum, praefatio.
3. Doc. ix.—Toland, J., "Socinianism Unmask'd."


Letter to Bittermans, in Miscell. Works, Vol. I, 1747.

---

**8 Giordano Bruno**

After gaining knowledge; following this, I got a book on memory printed entitled *The Shadows of Ideas*, which I dedicated to His Majesty. Forthwith he gave me an Extraordinary Lectureship with a salary.

Bruno invented an enigma and paradigm whereby the King might remember the Book of Genesis, and a fruitful figure of letters, signs, and numbers.

