Among other subjects, he probably lectured on the Physics of Aristotle. Giordano’s contributions were significant in his field.


Royal patron was of a singular and difficult disposition. He had received the fatal inheritance of a neurotic and unstable temperament; he was quick to imitate and quick to change. His susceptible mind had received some cultivation; but his nurture was even more unfortunate for one of such unbalanced disposition than is usual with an ordinary prince: he was brought up in a style of luxury and encouraged to let himself go at each momentary impulse.

Tasso believed that Henry’s character was injured during critical years by the dissipations forced on him during his sojourn in Italy. His contemporaries maintained that he was sound at heart but vacillating, a man of whims, subject to the allurements of the moment and the seductions of his companions. One day he would parade in the street as a penitent; another day he would don female garb and enact the painted harlot at a banquet, graced by the sanctioning presence of the Queen Mother.

He filled his court with loose women and scandalous youths. Often well-intentioned, his favor could not be depended on.


For he frequently became irresolute, incapable, and indolent. He left affairs of state to others to fondle lap-dogs. So nervous that a thunderstorm would frighten him into the cellars of his palace, he regarded it as a sacred temple of protection and liberality—a sanctuary for learning and a source of honor and power. The Court, too, was the school of manners, the patron of scholarship, science, and the arts. All hope of the advancement of letters rested on princes and nobles; even the means of livelihood might depend on their favor. The Court was the avenue to success. And, even in our own simple-minded and undesigning days, it is not every one who shall be so downright as was the Ettrick shepherd.


And address an antagonist as "damned sir" or subscribe himself yours, disgusted. However, Bruno, although he conformed to the courtly fashion of the time, felt real gratitude toward Henry, and there is nothing servile in his tone. He praises the King but remains conscious of his own worth and asserts it. In the sentence wherein Henry is addressed as famous and magnanimous, he is informed that the work presented to him is among the greatest; noble as to its subject and remarkable in its composition.

Bruno's gratitude was exceptional in being no mere passing flush of feeling. When away in England, he extolled Henry, and later, in Southern Germany, when Henry had incurred the reproach of all Europe, Bruno had a work printed in which he allowed a laudatory...


**Preface**, written in Paris,

It has been considered uncertain whether the "Extraordinary Lectureship with a salary," which the King gave Bruno, was at the Sorbonne or at the College de Cambrai, an institution that bore several names and is generally known as the College de France. I have, however, little doubt that he was appointed to the latter college.

1. Cena, Proemiale epistola Spacciò, Dial. III, 12.
2. Adam, Vittebergae, apud Zachariam Cratonem, anno 1588. Compare Centum et viginti articuli. Impressum Parisiis 1586.
3. Crevier, J. B. L.; Hist. de l'Univ. de Paris, 1771, II, 407.


- It was also known as the College of the Three Bishops. FIRST STAY IN PARIS 61  
So because, first, although founded in 1348, it was remodeled and endowed by Francis II and remained fostered and protected by the Throne. Secondly, it was a modern school opposed to the teaching of the ignorant Sorbonne, which had pronounced “Greek, Hebrew and elegant Latin to be the language of heretics” and directed its attention to more Catholic studies. As more liberal than the Sorbonne, the College of Cambrai was less unsuited to the highly unconventional teaching of Bruno. Although both establishments "now slavishly followed Aristotle," not long before it was at Cambrai that the would-be subverter did his work.


Logic, Pierre de la Ramée (Ramus), delivered his lectures.

Thirdly, Besler, who acted as one of Bruno’s copyists, wrote after the title of one of his works a treatise by Giordano Bruno, verily "the living sap of the Cambrai." Bruno himself calls a work published in 1588 "the Acrotismus of Iordanus Brunus of the Cambray."

Fourthly, two of his works—the one dedicated to the King and another dedicated to the Venetian Ambassador at Paris—were printed in the immediate neighborhood of the College of Cambrai, as is set forth on their title pages.

Again, on his second visit to Paris (1585), Bruno was partly supported by friends and dwelt with them.


5 The diarist already quoted notes that:

1. Lefranc, A; *Histoire du Collège de France*, 1893, pp. 240 seq.
2. Crévier op. cit., t. vi, pp. 384–86.

Tractatus succus immo G. B. Nalani Cameracensis, Erlangen Codex 1279. Vide Tocco, F; *Opere inedite di G. B.*, Nap., 1891, re 98 Ave.

3. J. B. Nolan i Cameracensis Acratismus. Camera as a Latin form for “camera” or “camara,” an arched roof or chamber! French chambre, taken as Cambrai.

4. De Umbris Idearum Parisiis apud Egid. Gorbini sub


Insigne Spei Peregrinans Camera Censu,

1582, cum privilegio Regis.

— De compendiosa Architectura Parisiensis apud Aggidiun Gorbinum, sub insignie Spei prope Collegium Camera cense, 1582.

3 Doc. ix.

