Sir H. Cobham, the English Ambassador in Paris, was in correspondence with Sir Henry Walsingham, the Queen's...


Secretary. Walsingham was a master organizer of espionage, and it was Cobham’s business to find out everything that was going on and send the news home. The Ambassador told the Secretary in a letter dated March 28th, 1583:

"Sir Doctor Jordano Bruno Nolano, a professor in philosophy, intends to pass into England; whose religion I cannot commend."

Whatever may have happened, Bruno departed from France bearing a letter of recommendation from the King to Michel de Castelnau, Lord of Mauvissière, who was his ambassador at the Court of Elizabeth. It is evident that Henry could be broad-minded on occasion and had some respect for intellectual pluck and power: it softens one’s view of him.


s judgement of that egregious monarch.  
1 Elton, 0; Modern Studies, Arnold, London, 1907, p. 334, addendum  
du m to note 9.

C H A P T E R VI  
THE EARLY WORKS

I. THE SHADOWS OF IDEAS

In 1582, Gorbin, whose shop was under the sign of "Hope," produced the second of Bruno's printed works but the first which has been preserved down to our own time. "De Umbris Idearum" ("The Shadows of Ideas") was dedicated to Henry and issued "with his privilege." Now Chytræus Iscolanus asserted in his commentary "In Sphera" that Solomon wrote a work on the shadows of ideas.


Idea and perhaps this statement suggested the title to Bruno. More than once he refers to Solomon and his Song in this book.

The work aimed at presenting to the King, men of cultured mind—scholars and students—an improved art of remembering. However, since the mnemonic system displayed is loosely associated with metaphysical bases, these are treated of in the first part of the book as "Shadows of Ideas," while the second part is entitled "The Art of Memory." The first part is frankly Neo-Platonic. Bruno had absorbed much Neo-Platonism; it was a popular doctrine in his time. It is true that he despised its Italian exponent, Pico della Mirandola, but the symbolic doctrine of the One True Light approached so near to the conceptions of the era.

1 Bartholmess, C.J. Bruno. Paris, 1846.


I, p. 190. Tocco, F. *Opere La tine di G. B. Firenze*, 1889, p. 44. The Canticles were supposed to be symbolic.

“I sat down under his shadow with great delight,” Canticles II, 3; “Until the day break and shadows flee away,” ibid., IV, 6, 17.

Auvray, loc. cit., sub Dec. 7, 56, 4.

68 GIORDANO BRUNO

of things, and things are the vestiges of the Being of beings. Throughout, he presupposes an ultimate identity of thought and thing; memory and nature; what is knowable and the unknown; fact and power. This opinion has been pretty generally held by the profounder thinkers.


The age was so convinced of the reality of a single principle that it sought eagerly for the Elixir of Life and the Philosopher's Stone. It had been shown by the later Greeks that sense-perception was not to be depended on for the discovery of truth. The Neo-Platonists therefore relied on the directness of intuition concerning high matters, regarding intuition as having the force of perception on a higher plane. This was also characteristic of the mystics and it greatly influenced Bruno. But he held man to be incapable of achieving the very truth.

We are but shadows of the Ineffable One; for the light which reaches us is confused and contradictory and mixed with darkness. We perceive good and evil together and in contrast, the beautiful associated with the ugly to which it is in opposition.

Looked at from the eternal point of view, all...


Even the worst evils are perfect; everything descends from the perfect, and everything strives to return home.

4 The human soul is to the human body as a pilot is to a ship: it is in it but not of it. Associated with the body, the soul perceives truth confusedly and as in flux.

5 But the Idea draws us on; and, in itself, it is not abstract but concrete and articulated.

7 Our ideas are like an admixture of light and shadow and not that absolute truth which they can never reach. None

1 De Umbris Idearum, Libri Tres, Liber I.
2 Ibid., Liber II.


4  
