Ibid., Int. VII. Plotin. Enn., V, 4, 36; V, 5, 12; VI, 5, 12.

5  
Ibid., Coni. IV, V. Cf. Plotin. Enn., IV, 3, 21; IV, 7, 1.

3  
Ibid., Cone. V, VI.

7  
Ibid., Cone. XV.

3  
Ibid., Int. II.


THE EARLY WORKS 69

Nevertheless, the mind can rise above the things of sense, perceiving unity in plurality. 

1. Mystic union with the Divinity was experienced by Plotinus and others. 

2. From the acceptance of this mystical experience thus avowed in this early work, Bruno never departed. But in his later works, wherein he reproduces far less Neo-Platonism and becomes vastly more original, he proclaims that by the exercise of reason also we can attain comprehensive contact with the Absolute, Who is at once the source and object of our search.

3. God is immanent as well as transcendent; for does not man share a measure of the Ineffable Light!

4. The interconnection of ideas naturally corresponds with that of things.

5. But memory is apt to break down, and where it does so, we may mend it by working on the lines of its natural operation.

6. He feels the significance of the principle of the Association of Ideas, which Aristotle was the first to recognize.


Indicate and uses it. He also culls the best from all writers of his time on mnemonics, as he told us in the preface he intended to do. Our ideas being shadows of truth, we use shadows of these shadows in mnemonics. We can economize thought by means of signs the nature of which is that they are shadows or traces.

To fix attention, maintain interest, and arouse emotional force, he introduces mythological subjects.

Imagine what a good drawing—a really useful tool for unearthing the buried treasures of the mind—would be to men who found books so hard to come by! But Bruno was endowed with a prodigious memory and falsely attributed his natural power to the artifices he employed. Probably the expectations he excited were not fulfilled.

This forms the subject-matter of *The Heroic Frenzies*. 

To fix attention, maintain interest, and arouse emotional force, he introduces mythological subjects.

Imagine what a good drawing—a really useful tool for unearthing the buried treasures of the mind—would be to men who found books so hard to come by! But Bruno was endowed with a prodigious memory and falsely attributed his natural power to the artifices he employed. Probably the expectations he excited were not fulfilled.

1 *Ibid.*, Conc. V.  
2 Conc. XVII–XIX. Cf. Porphyrius, Plotinus 23.  
4 *De Umbra*, Int. VII.  
5 *Ibid.*


I. VII.

57 Cfr. Plato; Repub. VI. 5.15.

De Umbris Memoriae, Pars II, De Subj. 2—5.

70 GIORDANO BRUNO

Bruno introduced great novelty in his mnemonics and was one of the “celestial thieves” of his generation. There are, in *De Umbris*, shadowings of his philosophic syncretism, but he had not yet welded the conclusions of others into a vital whole or made them live anew in his own more complete thought; the work is tentative and contains only the germ of the Bruno that was soon to appear. However, remarks such as "religious mysteries are mere institutions to train human eyes for the perception of the steep passage from darkness to light" are truly Brunian.

