This text was written with a rapid pen. This time, he wrote in Italian, and the book was printed by an Italian who had settled in Paris named Guglielmo Giuliano. Bruno tells us it was the fruit of "a few burning days" and differs wholly from his other writings for it is a stage play, full of rattling, roaring fun, and furnished with a satirical probe for credulity, pedantry, and pretense. Its world is full of the pursuers and hucksters of illusions; rogues abound, and fools are duped by miracle-mongers, alchemists, and pretenders to magic arts.

This comedy is entitled "Il Candelaio," which may be translated as The Chandler. In Bruno's time, the person who supplied candles also made them. Now, the manufacture of tallow dips is a noisome and undignified trade. Bruno, like Dante, loved to load words with more than their ordinary meaning.


Surface-meaning:

3 “Behold,” he says in the dedication, behold in the candle borne by this Chandler, to whom I gave birth that which shall clarify certain shadows of ideas. This product of imagination which shall set forth truth is dedicated with a letter to the lady Morgana, a name very suggestive of Fausta Morgana—the mirage—which is illusion. In this dedication, a multitude of ideas surge pell-mell.

I l Candelajo, a la signora Morgana.

Giordano Bruno

He is well off.

“Have him!”


"Yes, but he is too old. My daughter doesn’t have him, but my parents advise me to take him. But he doesn’t please me too well." Then don’t have him! "I know he comes of good blood. Have him!" "But I hear he has not teeth enough to bite a bean." Don’t have him! They tell me he has a pure-bred greyhound. "Have him!" "But, oh dear me,"


I hear he is only a chandler.  
"Don't have him!"  
"Everybody thinks him mad."  
"Take him! Take him, seven times over! His being a chandler doesn’t count; it’s no concern of yours if he can’t eat; if he doesn’t please you, no matter; what if he is old but he is mad—so take him."

Herein are furtive thrusts all round. The play begins with a few verses, then comes the mock-dedication. By a convention dating from classic times, every play required a prologue. Bruno will none of...


This text captures a love of buffoonery that pervaded the author's age. The author provides a synopsis of the characters and three closely interwoven but distinct plots of his comedy for the prologue. This is followed by an anti-prologue, then a pro-prologue, and finally, before the curtain rises, there is a speech from the beadle. All this, excepting the synopsis, is done in that spirit of humorous provocation so characteristic of Rabelais.

The play has five acts and eighteen characters, among whom Bonifacio, an elderly amorous miser; Bartolomeo, an avaricious seeker after the philosopher's stone; and Manfurio, pedant and fool, are chief. The pedant is of poor but pretentious intelligence—a naturally small vessel that bursts into absurdities when crammed with more than it was designed to hold. His ineptitude overflows in affectation and self-conceit, and he speaks in inappropriate Latin or latinized idioms. (Ibid., Act V, Scene XXIV.)


THE EARLY WORKS 77

He is an Italian man of words and phrases, of subtle distinctions without value, and of painstaking accuracy about trivial matters. He constantly brings up classical lore. He is unmarried and particularly attached to his pupil Pollula; it's noteworthy that the boy’s name is female.

Manfurio participates in everything going on but understands nothing; he is deceived and ridiculed, eventually falling for a fake watch, and receives a sound thrashing along with the other protagonists.

Bonifacio, married to the youthful Carubina, is in love with Vittoria, a woman of dubious character. She feigns affection only to drain his purse. In an effort to keep her, he commits endless foolish acts and seeks help from a magic professor, who exploits him financially. Subsequently, Vittoria switches places with Carubina. Bonifacio, in the guise of Bernardo, a painter also enamored with Carubina, is caught in this deception.


is thus confronted by his own wife dressed in Vittoria’s clothes. The pretended watchmen appear and force Bonifacio to give a bribe to their captain; meanwhile, Carubina is tête-à-tête with the painter. Finally, the deceived husband has to entreat his wife for pardon, and sails into more tranquil waters “by the grace of the Lord and the Madonna.”

The third protagonist, Bartolomeo, trusts himself to the direction of a designing alchemist who well-nigh exhausts his lean purse. A mixture containing a fictitious "powder of Christ" fails to work. After amusing scenes of roguery, the false watchmen appear and, by threatening prison, make their profit.

The play is a series of pictures depicting the seamy side of life.

For the morals of schoolmasters, see Garzoni, T.


**La Pazzia**

*Universale di tutte le passioni del mondo,* Venice, 1617.

78 GIORDANO BRUNO

Neapolitan life is depicted with its coarse language, which Bruno would have heard as a boy. It's possible that he wrote this work while in the monastery; certain references and its fresh, vigorous touches suggest it was based on recent impressions. However, a reference to a recent event indicates that it received at least finishing strokes in France, if not in Paris.

