In his castigation of vice, the very unpleasant aspects are unduly prominent, but the play is not as foul as those by Machiavelli, Bibbiena, and Aretino. It must be admitted that this comedy exhibits a great knowledge of life's seamy side and is an odd product of monastic discipline. Not so many years before, a Prince of the Church had officiated at the altar of Cyprian as well as that of Christ, and his comedy brought a blush to the face of even those who were not particularly severe prudes.


Isabella D’Este, while Erasmus tells us of a priest who took part in a Latin play. Even in Bruno's stricter days of Catholic Reform, the full effect of the Council of Trent was not felt, and no great blame attached to such lapses. We must not press too heavily on the fault. The Renaissance found frank indecency attractive; we have become more "delicately indelicate." Natural instincts held in leash are apt to manifest themselves in this vicarious and disagreeable way, and a "virile" young man, in a "virile" century at least, will revel in the obscene with the unconstrained gratification of a puppy dog. Moreover, many young men indulge in obscene speculation precisely for the same reason that lunatic maidens are said to utter foul oaths: there is fascination in the repellent and it is apt to produce an undue impression on the mind.


The plot is unduly complicated, reminiscent of the Spanish stage. The characters are abstract types, like those of Ben Jonson and dramatists of the second rank; however, they are drawn with rare felicity. The dialogue is quite as vivacious and clever as any by Aretino.

"The Chandler" is quite sui generis—a new development in comedy. It is easy, spontaneous—the overflow of an ardent and imaginative temperament. Both the obscenity and buffoonery of the play are partly intended to keep the audience amused; these elements are also introduced with this purpose in Bruno’s more serious writings.

The rediscovery of the classics eventually led to degenerate forms.


Humanists: Bruno is less tender toward these pedants than knaves—probably because he had suffered more at their hands. Philosophical theory peeks out in the play here and there. He believes that his enemies rejoice at his exile; but he is convinced he will obtain his due, if not under one hood, then under another; if not in one life yet in another—a remark which some have thought to show that he believed in an immortality not guaranteed by mere pantheistic Neo-Platonism he had so far expounded. In a somewhat earlier and more liberal age, Machiavelli expressed his contempt for the miraculous. Guicciardini thought those wonders best attested were examples of natural phenomena not yet understood. This was Bruno.


The author's attitude is clear from many passages in his books. In "The Chandler," he pours scorn on the trickery of the priesthood and hints at the miseries of monastic discipline. He is aware of his own originality and declares it; he does not disguise his Horatian contempt for the herd. There is no evidence that the play was ever performed.

References:
1. Baccelli, A., op. cit., p. 74.
2. Tellini, Carlo; Cfr. "Il Can," Prefazione, Biblioteca Paradisi, 1862.


---

“A La Signoria.”

“Morgana,”  
Guicciardini, F. Operae I., 129.

80 GIORDANO BRUNO

But, influenced by prior productions, it left its mark on those which followed in turn.

The comedies of that many-sided genius, Giambattista della Porta (who was a Neapolitan and a contemporary of Bruno), published more than twenty years later than the "Candelaio," show a singular resemblance to it. Within two generations, a French adaptation entitled "Boniface de Piedmont" was staged, followed by Cyrano de Bergerac’s "Le Pédant Joué."


Cyrano concentrated Bruno's trifoliate plot to the advantage of the play; however, he missed much of the vivacity of the original dialogue. He indirectly admits this by vowing that Italian twins would joke in their mother's womb.

"These adaptations influenced Molière; he extracted what suited him from Cyrano's version, saying that he had a right to it: 'On reprend son bien partout on le trouve.'"

Professor Adamson suggested that Manfurio was the prototype of Holofernes in Shakespeare's "Love's Labour's Lost."


Lost.

1. Sapampanato, PA  
   Los MZ  
   Aflleo. EZ  
   MZ  
   Tatáz, FR  
   El Candelaño, PORTO  
   DELA TORRE, 1905  

2. Sapampanato, S  
   Omsglosa nz e tr a a  
   A commeds


**Chapter VII: At Oxford**
