
Having made the disagreeable passage from Calais to Dover (Bruno's first experience of a journey by sea), he would not find that almost distinctive character of English scenery which obtains today. It was more like that of Northern France. For the most part, corn-land and pasturage were unenclosed, and there was a vast amount of uncultivated or poorly cultivated land, in spite of...


Enclosures made under the Tudors. He presented his credentials to the French Ambassador and went on to Oxford to try his fortunes there.

Opposition, disappointment, and defeat always incited Bruno to some fresh attack on the "parrots" who foolishly repeated ancient and defective teaching or, at best, tried to excuse the defects of their divinity, Aristotle. Barbarians who dwelt at the ends of the earth must assuredly be only too glad to welcome such a highly qualified teacher as he. So he began by beating the big drum.

He sent a foreword to the Vice-Chancellor and dons of the University which began thus: Jordanus Bruno of Nola, lover of God, doctor in a more perfect divinity, professor of purer and more harmless wisdom, a philosopher known, esteemed, and honorably entreated by the foremost academies of Europe, a stranger to none but churls and barbarians.


The Awakener of souls from slumber,  
the Queller of presumptuous and recalcitrant ignorance, one  
C. de la Connerie, Dial. IV.  
De La Casa, Dial. III.

82 GIORDANO BRUNO  
who showeth in all his actions the love he beareth to all men, whether Briton or Italian,  
female or male, whether bearing the mitre or the crown,  
the gown or the sword,  
wearing a cowl or without one; but who chiefly yearns  
for the man Whose converse is peaceful, human, true and profitable; he who seeks not for an anointed head or a crossed brow,  
for the washed hand or him that is circumcised, but for those true lineaments of man which are his soul and trained understanding; one who is abhorred by them that spread foolishness and are but petty dissemblers,  
but whom men proven and in earnest love, and who is applauded by the nobler sort.

This is the prelude to a request for permission to lecture.


Anything more calculated to cleave the general ear, make mad the guilty and appall the free, confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed!

But after all, the epistle only follows the pomposity of the age with Brunian emphasis. Even the most courtly and polished gentleman of his time, Sir Philip Sidney, when traveling to the Court of Rudolf II, had his arms emblazoned on whatever house he lodged at, with the announcement in *Philippi Sidnaei Jordanis Bruni Nolanis Legati Sigilli Rerum Explicatio*. An excellent summary of his most outstanding accomplishments and a clear justification of the author's most magnificent work.

The letter.


The dedication to Castelnau and a few leaves are not in all those copies of "Thirty Seals" which have been preserved. Moreover, they are printed on different paper; a different type was employed, and certain additions, of the nature of improvements, are present, which leads to the conclusion that the extra leaves were inserted as an afterthought. Cir. Tocco, *Le Opere Latine* (F Le G B), pp. 63—66. May not Bruno have inserted these leaves after his quarrel with the University, as an act of defiance, and joined with this a mark, in the form of a dedication to Castelnau, of his appreciation for the service he rendered him after that event! It would, I think, be just like Bruno to do this.

Bruno calls her the widow of true knowledge so far as philosophy and mathematics are concerned. He laughed at her pretensions to Greek scholarship. Yet, less than a century...


Before, the Oxford Hellenists, although a small group, were distinguished by the presence of such scholars as Grocyn, Linacre, and Colet. Erasmus found Greek better taught in England than in Italy.

Indeed, the English Universities had fallen from their high estate. Sport always held more attraction for the bulk of the English gentry than learning, which was almost confined to the priesthood. The French wars and even more so the Wars of the Roses were a hindrance to learning.

Even before the Reformation, John Barclay wrote:

> "Learning their time at the university,
Yet counting themselves of great authority
With their proud heads on their necks hanging;
They have the laws; but others have the cunning.
They think they have all science perfectly,
Within their hearts boasting of the same,
Though they never applied their minds thereto."

"Without the thing, they joy in the name."


When the Reformation was effected, Erasmus's warning of the menace it would pose to learning proved well-founded. The dissolution of the monasteries impoverished that scholarly class which opened a career for clever young people and provided them with university instruction. However, to employ the words of Descartes, the universities had not yet begun "to make merchandise of science for the bettering of their fortunes." Theology was the main interest. The dons were, for the most part, absentees, appointed by the Court.

Erasmus, De siderius; Opera Omnia, Lugduni Batavorum, 1703, Tomus Tertius. Epistulae.
