

St. CCCXLIII

John S. Barclay, "A History of Oxford," AT OXFORD 1855.

Followed the Court, clad in velvet. Bruno describes two of these graduates:  
“One wore two resplendent gold chains on his neck; another had twelve rings on two of his fingers: he looked like a rich jeweller.” A doctorate was easily obtained; it was purchasable. To become a doctor in medicine only needed a fee and that the candidate should have been in the habit of perusing medical books during ten years. The dons “knew much more about beer than about Greek,” says Bruno.

Most of the students were quite young lads. The statutes provided that any master or doctor diverging one jot from the teaching of Aristotle…


Should be fined five shillings for each offense.

No one could be admitted to the degree of Master or Doctor unless they had partaken of the Aristotelian fountain; but there were three fountains in the city, respectively called Aristotle, Pythagoras, and Plato. The waters thereof were used to qualify cider and beer. So that, Bruno maliciously observes, by three or four days' stay in a college or elsewhere, one could imbibe from all three.

He seems to have found some favor with Matthew, the Dean of Christ Church, and with Culpepper, the Warden of New College. He speaks respectfully of both these clergymen.

He would make the acquaintance of Italian teachers at the University, and he probably met Alberico Gentile there at festivals or elsewhere. Gentile came to England in 1580.


And was appointed professor of Civil Law at Oxford four years later. Bruno certainly knew him in England and met him again at Wittenberg.

After he had taught between two and three months, there came to Oxford (in June) Albertus Laski.


1. Palatine of Siradia, a Pole, visited England on a mission to prevent the exportation of arms to Muscovy. The visit of a prince from such remote regions, credited with great bravery as a soldier and considerable linguistic knowledge, created significant excitement in England. Oxford welcomed him with heavy feasting, erudite disputations, spectacular displays, and the vibrant energy characteristic of the Renaissance. This likely heightened Bruno's acute awareness of vicissitudes, as Laski, who had shown his greed for gold by taking bribes from France at the election of Henry II to the Polish crown, soon had to flee from his English creditors with all precautions of silence and secrecy. He was accompanied by the occultist Dr. John Dee and another professor.


The art of transmuting base metal into gold. Among the entertainers at Laski's court was Matthew Gwyn, son of St. John’s, a young Welshman who became one of Bruno's English friends and later assisted Florio in his unparalleled translation of Montaigne. Gwyn was a well-rounded individual; he added to his accomplishments in music with knowledge of French and Italian. He became a dramatic author (in Latin) and had some understanding of medicine.

When Laski was at Oxford, Gwyn held forth with others on such problems as whether males or females are longer-lived and whether events can be foretold from the stars. These disputations, held in honor of the Prince, gave Bruno his chance. He shall tell his own tale. “Search where you will in England today; you shall find everybody...” - Camden, W.; Annales, tr. R. Norton.


Snoa Nno 1.5  
83

— Wood, Anthony Aylmer, Oxonensis c. F. a. s.t.i., sub Alascie.  
2 Bain, R. N Cantor. M.A. flirt, 1904, [11, p.85].  
1 Nat. Dict. Biog., 1890, xi, pp.399-400.

AT OXFORD

A Doctor in Grammar so that the happy country is ruled by a constellation of pedants who exhibit obstinacy, ignorance, and presumption, mixed up with such boorish rudeness that it might provoke the patience of Job. Should you doubt, go to Oxford and get them to tell you about what happened to the Nolan when he disputed publicly with these Doctors of theology before Prince Laski the Pole and certain others.


English nobles. Learn how they replied to his argument and how, on that great occasion, a wretched doctor got stuck like a chicken in stubble fifteen times in the fifteen syllogisms he propounded as Coryphaeus of the University.

Hear tell how vulgar and violent the pig was, and how patient and forbearing the other was, who showed his Neapolitan breeding and rearing under a kindly sky. Ask how they put a stop to his public lectures, both on the Immortality of the Soul and on the Quintuple Sphere.

Brave, tactless, self-assertive missionary of truth! Like Mr. F’s aunt, Bruno hated a fool. Nevertheless, to call one's opponent a pig...


Merely, it was an exhibition of self-restraint in days when scholars, especially theologians, were not content with scurrilous epithets that a bargee might envy and which are now expunged from our dictionaries. Instead, they were wont to traduce the whole house and ancestry of an adversary, including the chastity of its female members.

2  
Bruno, then, aroused the Aristotelian lion from his slumbers in a favorite lair. Oxford rejected him, no doubt with many an insular sneer at the excitable, gesticulating foreigner, hairy as Pan.

3  
Later on, when the feeling of resentment had somewhat subsided, while still continuing to pass some satirical strictures on the University, he gave a more balanced judgment. See, for example, Bayle’s Dictionary; article, C. de Loisy, Dial. V.
