
3 Small


Worries tortured the nerves of a man whom even the cruelest death could not dismay. Like the rest of us, he was made of strangely compounded clay. Full of noble gratitude, lofty conception, serene wisdom, and an heroic passion to know truth and proclaim it, he was yet somewhat prejudiced, irritable, vain, very impulsive and restless, a little snappy, somewhat resentful, wholly indiscreet, and given to singular crotchets and ill-timed bursts of strange, if generous, enthusiasm. A contemporary might have judged him thus—likely in the case of Brillat-Savarin. However, our wonder at this man of high and continued purpose is not lessened by his human weaknesses.


Our respect for the unfailing patience and kindness of the Castelnaus towards their somewhat difficult guest is increased. The passionate Southern Italian, knowing about three words of the English tongue and deeming it fit only for dogs, not wishing to learn more, may have gotten into trouble in the London streets. If so, possibly the lady whose "malicious feminine rage and false tears, which can be more powerful than any volume of swollen billows" had something to do with it. Seneca thinks he got into a row, was imprisoned, released by the good offices of Madame de Mauvissière, and kept at home for a time. Certainly, Bruno rehearses to Castelnaus how "not only did you receive and sustain me, but defended me, set me free, held me safe, kept me in harbour." We certainly learn that, on account of his...


Severe strictures were placed on the English people; he dared not appear in the streets and remained shut up at home. Possibly, the lady in question had some hand in this.

Very soon after taking up his abode at Beaumont House, Bruno must have accompanied his host to Court, for he knew the Spanish Ambassador there. Mendoza was expelled from England in January 1584 after the detection of his complicity in plots against Elizabeth’s life. "The Queen knew me," says Bruno, "for I accompanied the" (Gena, Dial. III). 

Causa, Proem. Epist. Sensini, T S alp ensi el of losofi co di G.B., 1907.


4 Cause, P. Epist.

5 Cena de l' Amico.

6 Cause I, where Armesso speaks for the first time.

7 Doc. xvi

94 GIORDANO BRUNO

Ambassador to Court habitually.

Italian gentlemen were welcome at Elizabeth's Court. She prided herself on her knowledge of their language; most of her courtiers had visited Italy; many of them were well-versed in Italian literature, and all formed their manners on the Italian model. It was to the incalculable advantage of our behavior and our literature that so many gentlemen were tried and tutored abroad. However, the less stable spirits came back from their travels to exhibit "strange antic tricks," the absurdity of which Bruno did not catch. But Shakespeare did. Look you lisp, says Rosalind.


And wear strange suits, disable all the benefits of your own country, be out of love with your nativity, and almost chide God for making you of that countenance you are. I will scarcely think you have swum in a gondola.

It was the prevalent passion for Italy and deep respect for the Italian language and literature which gave Bruno an opportunity to publish his noblest works through a London press in his own tongue. There was no university in London; otherwise, scholars would have dismissed any thought, however profound, that was not expressed in the language of the learned.

Bruno admired Elizabeth and wrote of her as superlatively as custom demanded. He called her "a Protestant ruler" and "sacred."


"Divine," just as he did with His Most Christian Majesty and the Head of the Holy Roman Empire: it was treasured against him and brought up at his trial. Of Elizabeth's courtiers, he neither knew nor expected to know Leicester, at least in the earliest part of 1584; but he would certainly be known to Walsingham. He was noticed by Fulke Greville, a scholarly young courtier about two years younger than himself. Greville stood high in esteem: he proposed to dedicate a book to Greville. 

Doc. xi.  
Gen. Dial. I.  
Causes of Dialogue II.

96 GIORDANO BRUNO


But he never did so. To Sidney, he dedicated his two important works on moral subjects.

Sidney was the English representative of Petrarchism, though he was far from copying the current ignoble and degenerate affectation of love that then prevailed in Italy. He fell head over heels in love with Penelope Devereux when she was still a child. The only satisfaction he ever obtained was a kiss stolen from her while she slept; but sexual fascination remained so divorced from matrimony in the sixteenth century that he continued to address verses of passionate devotion to her after she became Lady Rich, with the full knowledge and consent of both his sister and the lady who was now his wife. He identified "Stella" with Beauty, and it is the opinion of the best judges of the age that Spenser's representations regarding the sincerity and depth of the passion are calm and deliberate facts.

Now Sidney’s verses were not published.


Until after his death; but they were widely circulated in manuscript and were already famous. His love for Stella was generally known. Bruno writes to him as a distinguished poet. He had been in London and attending the Court at least considerably more than a year, if not over two years, when he did so, and would know therefore of this passion. And of how, repelled by Stella, Sidney had turned his love to nobler issues than personal gratification, though he nursed it still. Bruno wished to put before Sidney and the world a higher form of adoration; he would substitute devotion to the imperishable beauty of wisdom for courtly love.

*References:*

- Spaccio de la Bestia Trionfante Gli Eroi ci Furori.
