
Etcetera est si quillus  
si quillorum.  

1 La cena de le Ceneri.  
1 De la causa, principio et uno.  
1 De l'infinito, un verso et mondo.  

5 Cfr. Elton, *O Modern Studies*, 1907, p. 322, n. 20.  
— McIntrye, J. L.; G. Bruno, 1903, p. 358, n. 5.  
6 Doc. xi.  
7 Spaccio de la Bestia trionfante.  

IMPRESSIONS OF ELIZABETH'S ENGLAND I  
Sidney, bears the press-mark Paris, 1584 but, since the work contains a reference to a riot at Naples which occurred in May 1585, it is obvious that it must have been printed later.


After that date, the next work, "Cabala of the Steed Like unto Pegasus, With the Addition of the Asses of Cyllene," bears the press-mark "Paris, 1585" and is dedicated to an imaginary bishop of Casamarciano, a little place in Bruno's native province. Following this, in the same year, came "The Transports Of Intrepid Souls," which, like the Cabala, purports to have been printed by a fictitious Antonio Baio at Paris. It was dedicated to


Sidney. Several of the Italian books contain remarks on England, but "Ash-Wednesday Supper" has pages of satiric observation mingled with half-humorous exaggeration, never without a touch of severity. Bruno makes some apology for these in the "Causa" but sticks to his main indictment. He was struck by the pasturage in England, so rich and green, by the splendid flocks of “pretty, excellent, fat, white and nimble lambs” it nourished, and by the Englishman’s love of sport; he liked the climate, “the heavens being more temperate than anywhere else beyond and on this side the Equator.”


Snow and heat are banished from the subjacent earth as well as the excessive heat of the sun, which the perpetually green, flowery ground witnesses, thus enjoying perpetual spring.

Like Erasmus, he found the Englishwoman charming. She is graceful, gentle, soft, delicate, youthful, beautiful, slender, with fair hair, rosy cheeks, divine eyes, firm breasts, and shining hands; to select from a string of admirable qualities.

References:
1. Fiorentino, F., Diari Morali di G. B., Giornale Napoletano, N.S., 1882, fasc. 19, p. 42.
2. Cabala del Cavallo Pegaseo.


'Aggiunta di alcune poesie.

1. Degli Eroi e Furori, Spaccio, III.
5. Spaccio, III. Cena, Dialogo IV.

GIORDANO BRUNO

He lives long on the almsbasket of words to express his admiration! One of the very best stanzas he wrote in England praises "the gentle nymphs who make a stay on the green banks of the Thames so charming." Just before this, he had spoken of "the beautiful and gracious nymphs of Father Thames."

He noticed the marking of the royal swans and observed the great flocks of crows. He criticized how inhuman the game-laws were and how eager was the Englishman to be a landowner! He valued the broad acres and their management.


Minded Britons who became his friends, and the educated Italianate gentlemen of the Court. But his disposition was not especially forbearing, and he was fastidious like Horace in shrinking from the rude humours of the mob. “I hate the populace,” he told Castelnau.

To pass from Italy to France was to go back more than one generation in polish of manner and cultivation of mind; and, compared with France, England was still a semi-barbarous country. Poetry, after nearly two centuries of almost complete silence, was indeed chirping the first imperfect notes of a new morning song, and Spenser trilled fresh, delightful music in his “Shepherd's Calendar”; Lyly in “Euphues,”


A rural romance attempted to give finish and elegance to British prose; however, Marlowe’s mighty line did not yet resound in the rough playhouses of the metropolis. Works like “Gorboduc,” “Ralph Roister Doily,” and a few masque-like productions by Lyly represented the best that had been done for British drama up to that time.

In *Eroici* (P. II, Dial. V), Spacio asks in Dial. III: "What must we do with the swan?" Juno demanded of Jupiter, who ordered, "I command that it be marked on the bill with my seal and put into the Thames because there it will be safer than anywhere else. And thus no one will dare to rob me for fear of capital punishment."


I bid you farewell. As time progresses, proems and epistles find their place akin to Horace's Odes, III, 1. GIORDANO BRUNO speaks of a scene where one is surrounded by an excrementitious mob of rowdies who have sprung up more quickly than the warriors fabled by poets when Jason sowed dragon's teeth. It would seem as if Earth disgorged them; however, they come from the shops and present a highly dignified and civilized array of long staves, halberds, pikes, and rustic forks. For whatever worthy purpose the Sovereign may have granted them, these are always held in readiness for this and similar opportunities.


---

**Notes:** They shall fall upon you with outlandish fury, not reflecting on whom, why, wherefore or how; there is no deliberation. Each discharges his natural contempt for the stranger; and, if he be not impeded by the very press of folk all bent on the same purpose, you shall have the measure of your doublet taken by fist or rod, and, if you are not wary, you shall have your hat staved in. All this even if you are accompanied by some person of means or quality—let him be count or duke; it shall be to his damage and not to your profit—for, in a herd, these folk are no respecters of rank, and however he may disapprove, he must stand aside, look on, and await the finish.
