
The serving men, he says, are of various grades: needy gentlemen, bankrupt merchants, broken-down students, runaway soldiers and sailors as well as gaol-birds and wastrels who are wont to hang about the Exchange and St. Paul's.


For hire.

Even in refined circles, the loving cup was passed around, much to Bruno's disgust. He draws a nauseating picture of this and other scenes. These are not the only criticisms he makes on English social life. The work entitled “The Ash Wednesday Supper” is an attack on Aristotelian Physics and Cosmology. This is led up to by a row on the Thames and a walk through London to Fulke Greville's abode, where a supper has been prepared for Bruno and his antagonists.

Impressions of Elizabeth's England 105


A hot disputation follows the repast. Everyone seems to have taken this as a veridical account of real happenings. I cannot do so. I do not dispute that, at some time, Greville may have heard Bruno debating the point, perhaps in his own apartment, and certainly it would be a very frequent subject of discussion between Bruno and his friends or visitors at Beaumont House. He admits that this was the case at supper on an Ash Wednesday.

When asked by the Inquisitors whether he had written concerning an Ash Wednesday Supper and what was his purpose therein, he replied: "I have written a book in five dialogues so entitled, which dealt with the earth's movement, and because I debated the matter in England at an Ash Wednesday supper with certain doctors of medicine at the house of the French Ambassador at which I dwelt, I called the dialogues 'The Ash Wednesday Supper.' It may be that there are certain errors in the book which I cannot now recall precisely. The book was intended to ridicule these doctors and their opinions concerning these matters."

The Inquisitors did not pursue the subject. It has been suggested...


That Bruno deliberately made a false statement as to where the supper took place in order to minimize his offense, and located it, therefore, at the house of an orthodox Catholic. That would not be like Bruno: like other men he sometimes evades an inconvenient question or puts the best face he can on the answer he is obliged to give, but to direct unescapable questioning, he invariably gives perilously straightforward replies. The Inquisitors knew about the book; they may have had it before them taken at a pied de lettre—it refutes Bruno's reply so far as the place is concerned.

There were errors in his exposition of Copernicanism which he corrected in *De Immenso*. Doc. xi, i. 106 GIORDANO BRUNO


Concerned. And he could not have forgotten where the supper was held after writing a whole book around it. A careful examination of the work convinces me that while the supper and disputation are based on facts, these have been altered, rearranged, and played upon by Bruno’s lively imagination, working them up into literary form. He wants to make discussion go down by furnishing attractive dishes; at the same time, he wishes to open the safety valve of his indignation at British obtuseness and manners. If he and a few friends discussed Natural Philosophy and fish together on Ash Wednesday, it would be quite in his manner to turn the Aristotelian physics and cosmology into a "Supper of Ashes."

He more than hints that he has invested everything with such literary merit in his prefatory letter to Castelnau. “You will ask me,” he writes, “‘What symposium, what banquet is this!’”


It is supper.

"What supper!"

"Ash Wednesday's."

"Who talks about a supper on Ash Wednesday? The repast must have taken place before then. Would you say, 'I have eaten ashes like bread'?"

No, it is a banquet after sundown on the first day of Lent, which our priests call the day of Ashes and Remembrance.

"What is the banquet for!"

Not to consider the mind and possessions of the very noble and worthy Master Fulke Greville, at whose honored abode it takes place; nor the fine manners of the very courteous gentlemen who were there as lookers-on and listeners. But who will may see what nature is capable of in producing two fantastic fooleries.


1  
PSALM CIX, 9.  
We must always bear in mind the possibility of symbolic allusion in an age passionate for allegory and at the hands of a past master of the art. The Aristotelian sun had set for the wise. I do not wish to push this after the manner of Shakespeare-Baconians.

1.e., the journey and the display of ignorant prejudice at the discussion.

108 GIORDANO BRUNO  
The presence of the lords and servants whom the guests find in the hall is suggestive of the palace itself, and Bruno, who gibes at their rudeness, may have directed his sarcasm at Elizabeth’s servitors because he had experienced little courtesy at their hands. If my view be correct, Bruno has run together a multitude of experiences, one of which may have been at Greville's table, and adorned them, not merely to ridicule these doctors,


to dinner. Let us look at Elizabeth’s London through Bruno’s eyes.

Two messengers come to him from a certain esquire at the Court, asking him to give his views concerning the Copernican theory. He replies that he does not see through Copernicus's eyes, but with his own! We next find Bruno in conversation with Fulke Greville, whom we must infer is the esquire in question. Greville asks Bruno why he believes in the rotation of the Earth. Bruno replies that he has not the measure of Greville’s capacity for grasping it; he (Bruno) may be as one of those who talk to images and address the dead. If Greville will furnish the reason for his belief, he will reply to it.

Greville is very pleased at this answer and invites Bruno to dinner.


