To meet and discuss the problem with a company of gentlemen and learned folk on Ash-Wednesday. Bruno accepts but begs that opponents may be chosen who are not ignoble people, miscreants, and of small understanding in these matters. Master Fulke replies that Bruno need have no fear, for the men he has in mind are of the best learning and behavior.

“The learning and behavior” thus skillfully introduced is by no means exhibited to their advantage in the sequel. Bruno hears no more of the matter, and when the day appointed comes around, he waits and waits. Dinner time passes over, so he gives up the whole thing and goes home.

Dial. I. I
Ibid.
Dial. II

IMPRESSIONS OF ELIZABETH


S ENGLAND 109

Out to call on some Italian friends... He does not return  
to Beaumont House till after sunset. Behold, John Florio and Matthew Gwynne are waiting impatiently at the doorway for him. They tell him he must hurry along with them; a company of knights, gentlemen, and doctors have assembled at Greville's house and expect him.

Bruno is aggrieved and shows it. He supposed he would be asked to dinner to discuss matters with plenty of time ahead. Gwynne explains that certain knights desired to be present but were unable to come for dinner and have come instead for the later meal.

Reading between the lines, Bruno, who is always ready to praise those English gentry who have traveled in Italy and learned manners there, has received a slight or so from them and resents it. It is conceivable that Greville may have found some side comment aimed at himself here.

Our author then works up his London experiences, placing the narrative in the mouth of Teofilo, who serves as his own mask. The little party who...


Although I was in such a hurry, I have taken nothing but the shortest cut to reach the great watery highway—the safest, speediest, and pleasantest route to Westminster. 

We wasted time yelling for oars as much as it would have taken to go by land and do a little business on the way. At length, two boatmen answered from afar and slowly drew in. After much question and reply about whence, where, why, how, and when, they brought the prow to the foot of the stairs. And lo! One of them, who might have been old Charon, held out his hand to Nolan, and another, who was his son I think—a fellow of about 65— took us in.

The boat looked like a cork; it was so ancient and worm-eaten. But it went like lead, as the arms of the rowers were so palsied. Its creakings and gratings...


Mingling with the splash of the feeble oarsmen was the burlesque of a musical accompaniment that incited Florio to break out with a love-ditty, and Bruno followed on with another song.

“It took us a long time to make little way, and before we had covered a third of our journey, just past a place called the Temple, our old fathers, instead of hurrying on, turned the prow shorewards. The Nolan asked, ‘What are you doing! Do you want to take breath!’ Their answer was interpreted to him: they were not going farther; their station was at this spot.

Entreaty after entreaty proved worse than useless. Having paid and thanked them (what else could be done to such scoundrels in such a place?), they showed us the way to the street. The footpath commenced in mud which, millly willy, must be gone through.”

Here comes a sly laugh at himself.


Satiric spirit which pervades the whole composition: The Nolan, who had studied and taught in the schools more than we did, said, “I observe a filthy way out; follow me.” But while he was yet speaking, he got so firmly stuck in the mud that he could not stir a limb; and we had to help one another, hoping that this purgatory would soon come to an end. But by malicious luck, he and we found ourselves engulfed in a slimy passage, which was surrounded by strong walls, as if it had been a veritable enclosure of jealousy or a garden of delights. And, there being no light to guide us, we could not tell the way back or on; so, hoping every step would be the last, we waded on up to the knees through that deep and gloomy hell. Bruno must have sighed for his Italian cities, their side streets, even paved with stone! At last, the adventurers came to a mud-cake with a stony margin where they could walk dry-foot, but in some danger.


Of tumbling and breaking head or limb. 

Finally, we arrived at what seemed to us to be the Elysian fields—the main street—and behold! there we were about 112 GIORDANO BRUNO men. Even small tradesmen educated at the grammar schools could write to one another in Latin; so, in deference to the doctors, the debate was conducted in that language, since Bruno spoke no English.

The portraits of Bruno’s opponents were engraved for all time by a scornful, pitiless burin: there they stand, self-important and pompous pedants. One has an emphasis on his face such as the Father of the Gods wore when he sat at the celestial council to fulminate an awful sentence against the impious.

He admired the gold chain around his neck and then glanced at the Nolan.


In her breast, where the loss of a button were more likely to be found.

Then he sat bolt upright, took his elbows off the table, shook himself a little, gave a short snort, adjusted his velvet cap, twirled his moustache, made his scented face assume due expression, arched his eyebrows, distended his nostrils, cast a glance backward, set himself in order, struck an attitude—left hand to left side, as if he were opening a fencing match. He held up three fingers of his right hand and began with a few preliminary flourishes.

But the longer Bruni stayed in England, the more reconciled he became to its ways. He even found it “a beautiful, fortunate, and chivalrous country.” When in Germany, he forgot the petty annoyances and disappointments he had experienced and expressed his admiration at the aggressive achievements of our sea-dogs.


3 After all, he had spent the most peaceful days he ever knew during his exile in England. A French contemporary wrote of blessed England as the abode of quiet and humanity.

