4 Yet even here the Nolan was far from feeling settled; for Castelnau’s recall had been issued, and he had long awaited it to be put into effect. Even the most distinguished among Elizabeth's courtiers were...

1 Ovid Metamorph., I, 170 sqq.
2 Cenae, Dial. IV.
3 De Immensa, Lib. I.
4 Langletus, H.Epistolw, XCI V.

IMPRESSIONS OF ELIZABETH


England 1 1 3  
Far from recognizing the genius of the most distinguished Italian they had ever received among them, contemporary Englishmen seemed to have had little inkling of the profound originality of his speculations. His Neo-Platonism was easily grasped and found all too familiar; in truth, his subject matter was not cared for, and his Italian style, which was by no means easy even for his own countrymen, was very displeasing to a generation that delighted in Tasso.

At last, late in October 1585, the Castelnau family went back to France with Bruno. Black clouds were already gathering around the Ambassador; still more evil days awaited that generous gentleman. During the journey, he was robbed of everything he had, down to his shirt. He landed at Calais.


In a state bordering on destitution, a recently discovered manuscript informs us that Bruno, who could afford the loss of worldly goods even less than Castelnau, was also plundered. A diarist enters under December 27, 1585: "Jordanus has told me that his manservant either has robbed him or suffered him to be robbed."

Bruno had spent two and a half years when a man's powers are at their fullest flow in England, and these years witnessed the writing and actual production of great books. Not content with these labors, he was busy at an astronomical work to be called "The Purgatory of Hell," which he promised to lend to Smith so that he might see the fruit of redemption.


4 We hear no more of him. Bacon groups him with Patrizzi, Telesio, Campanella, and others as near his excellence or success (Hist. Nat. et Exp. Landini). He is just mentioned by the author of "Antididason" and by Thomas Watson in the dedication of "Compendium Memoriae Loci." The former ranks him with Dicson and others as a self-advertising writer on mnemonics; the latter speaks of his mystical and profound Sililli.

1 McIntyre, op. cit., p. 47.

1 Auvray, L.; op. cit.

4 Cena, Di, V. H

1 GIORDANO BRUNO
This work was perhaps never printed. Was it ever? He may have altered the title, and we may possess the work in the Latin poem "De Menso," for he would seem to have been laboring on this during the hours of waiting to embark at Dover, although it was not finally finished and published until six years later.

1 De Immense, I.


I v. Schol.

Giordano Bruno

He makes an advance on the Neo-Platonists by declaring intellect to be always with us, whether we are aware of it or not; there is an evolution from sense upwards, more complex and more perfect as it ascends. One Principle alone unfolds itself in all its manifestations, whether these be high or low; for Essence, Power, Activity, Actuality, and Possibility are all one in the last resort, as Parmenides saw.

The guides of the Intellect are Love, the producer of all things; Art, which is highest when nearest to Nature (for in Nature the Soul of the World operates); Mathematics and True Magic, which reveals the inner nature of things. Form and Matter do not exhaust themselves in any particular thing.


They are endless.  
Con ti nua.

6

Here and there, acute observations are to be found such as that alchemists will never arrive at the secret of the Philosopher’s Stone but will make many valuable discoveries in their attempt. Logic is a sharp spur, but emotion is its driving force. He expresses his abhorrence of the enthronement of suffering by “religion.” He is at one with the less cautious of the Psychical Researchers of our own time; he accepts the levitation of St. Thomas Aquinas, second sight, the migration of the soul, and trances wherein a wise control unites with the spirit of the psychic.


7, while he scoffs at vulgar pretenders to magic arts.

Sigilla, Pars II, § 31.
Ibi d., Pars I, §§ 31–34.
Ibi d. 34.

The Middle Ages found in Plato the notion of the world and stars being “animals,” and of a Soul of the Universe proceeding from the Creator and enjoying “an ever-ceasing and rational life.” Cf. Plato, Timaeus 30–37. This philosophical doctrine was generally current in Bruno’s time.

