---

**Works Printed in London, 1712:**

He accepts the animation of the universe; some creatures are vastly higher, others vastly lower than we are, but the earth, the planets, and the stars are "celestial animals, more intellectual than we."

In a universe which is infinite and eternal, "the flaming bodies of space are the messengers of God, declaring his excellent glory and majesty. Thus our vision is enlarged to behold the infinite effect of the infinite."


Cause, and we are taught to seek divinity not far off but closer to us than we are to ourselves. He perceived that if the discovery of Copernicus had diminished the importance of man in the Universe, it had exalted him as a being capable of grasping such a large view. The Aristotelian view of the Universe was based, like the plain man's, on sensible appearance; but it is the function of the intellect to pass beyond the mere appearances of sense to truth. Yet, to do this we must observe Nature and, quitting the Aristotelian definitions of Essence and Attribute and the like, we should examine natural phenomena and inquire for the conditions under which events do or do not happen. Existence and its Cause are alike infinite, and nothing perishes though everything changes.

This renitent globe,


This star, not being subject to death, dissolution, and annihilation—since these are impossible anywhere in nature—renews itself by changing and altering all its parts. There is no absolute up or down, as Aristotle taught; there is no absolute position in space. Instead, the position of a body is relative to that of other bodies. Everywhere, there is incessant relative change in position throughout the universe, and the observer is always at the center of things. All celestial bodies are no less secure than the Earth; they require nothing to support them! There is no absolute lightness or weight in things, as Aristotle proposed.  

References:  
- Genesis Dialogue 4a, Properties of the Universe; cf. Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, VI, 7, 1141a, 34; De Costa, I, 2.  
- Ibid., Dialogue 1.  
- Ibid., Dialogue V.  

Giordano Bruno


They have a certain impetus towards or away from each other. He accepts an ancient scientific conception: there is certainly an ether; for movement can only take place by direct contact. However, since the ether is too light to move the heavenly bodies, they must be propelled by the energy of their souls.

The sun moves on its axis; but this is not all—it varies its position among the stars, of which it is one. He tells us about the discovery of Cusanus that there are spots in the sun and attributes the scintillation of the stars to them being suns that give out their own light. Venus does not twinkle because its light is reflected.

He observes that the Earth’s atmosphere...


The sphere rotates with her. Much shrewder is the geologic discernment that natural forces are in constant operation and produce very slow but vast changes in land and sea.

6

Bacteriologists may choose to find a remarkable anticipation of modern discovery in the passage:

“It seems to me more than likely, since everything shares in life, that a countless multitude of creatures live not only in us but in all composite things.”

He goes on to say:

“When we observe anything to die as we call it, we should not so much believe it to be death as change; the mere accidental composition and harmony ceasing, but the things to which they happen remaining immortal, whether they be spiritual or material, as we shall show on another occasion.”

11 Cena, Dial. V.

11 Ibid., Dial. V.

11 Ibid., Dial. III, 4a Prop. de Nundinio.

4 Ibid., 3


A Prop. di Nun di n i o.

I bid 2 A Prop. di N un di n i o.

I bid, Di al. V.

7 I bid Di al. III, 4a P rop. di N u n di n i o.

