**III. ON CAUSE, PRINCIPLE, AND THE ONE**

This is a brilliantly original treatise on Metaphysics. The new view of the Universe carried with it a perception of the inadequacy of scholasticism and the need for a new departure in Philosophy.

1. The work consists of five dialogues.
2. The first of these has three interlocutors and is intended to excuse and vindicate the strictures on England, which had proved distasteful. In the four following dialogues, Teofilo expounds Bruno’s philosophy to Gervase, Dickson, and a humanist called Polinius. The dialogues are prefaced by a letter to Castelnau.


Short poems, of which three are in Latin and two in Italian. These verses strike a note of lofty thought and feeling, which finds fuller expression later on in the work. Bruno springs from the ground and wings skyward like the lark, soaring in ever-widening circles, floating his throbbing song into the infinite, but interrupting it now and again by a sudden drop for rest to the homely earth.

Throughout Bruno’s life-work, we find Plato's doctrine of Ideas and Neo-Platonic imagery of Emanation becoming less and less operant. In "The Cause," he takes up Aristotelian conceptions and works through these philosophic distinctions, as well as certain theological distinctions, to an independent view. But, while he is obliged to use current terminology and the categories of Aristotle and the schoolmen, he feels that they hamper him in expressing his thought clearly and unmistakably.


Aristotle never tires of distinguishing by reason what is. The second dialogue has been translated by J.K. Royce in Rand's Modern Classical Philosophers, London, 1908.

128 GIORDANO BRUNO

He has worked himself through the trammels of scholastic terminology and subtle but inadequate distinctions; however, they are mental currency, and there is no other way than to employ them. So he begins by distinguishing between Principle and Cause. A principle is that which lies within the constitution of a thing and is necessary to its being, while the cause of a thing is external to it, yet concurs with it as necessary to its production.

Now the Schoolmen, following Aristotle, employed certain useful distinctions in causality. Bruno deals, therefore, with Cause as Efficient, the source of change; Formal...


That which makes a thing what it is, and the final purpose to be attained. In the efficient cause of the Universe, he discovers the Universal Mind, which is the inmost, most real, and characteristic faculty and potential aspect of the Universal Soul.

It is not fully expressed in any particular thing; therefore, so far, it is extrinsic. Yet it also operates within the thing, making it intrinsic as well. The formal cause is that "ideal reason without which the agent could not operate any more than an artist can work without the idea of his work in his mind." The final cause of the Universe is its perfection, wherein, in different parts of matter, all forms actually exist. This end so delights and satisfies the universal intellect that it never wearies of giving birth to all kinds of forms in matter.


"But while the ideal reason, as presupposed in the actual, is a Cause when actualized, it is a Principle. We find that, in this regard, Principle and Cause coincide. So far, we have been dealing with Forms (another ancient distinction). We also have to deal with the Matter in which they are realized.

1. Cause, Dia L. II. Aristotle asserted the ultimate cause of movement to be a final cause. For Bruno, Form is an "impression" of the Ineffable, whether idea or material configuration."

Works Printed in London 29

---

Note: Some specific references (e.g., "Mat. xii 7, 1072 a, 2") and certain terms have been retained as they appear to be context-specific citations or concepts.


The term refers to that out of which anything may come to be formed. Of course, there is no sharp distinction between the "thinking thing" and the "extended thing" in Bruno's work until Descartes made that distinction. Before then, thinkers were content with the notion held by children and primitive man: body and soul as a unity in action. In less mature years, Bruno had been influenced by ancient philosophers and Avicebron, regarding Matter as the sole substance of things. However, upon deeper thought and consideration of other facts, we must distinguish between form and material substance.

The Soul of the Universe must be akin to the individual soul and may be likened to a pilot guiding a vessel.

Within that which he guides, in our world, Matter and Form are never separate. Virgil knew this when he wrote that the world is interpenetrated by Spirit and that Mind moves Mass.

3. Solomon declares the same thing when he says, "The Spirit of the Lord fills the world: and that which contains all things has knowledge of the voice."

"If Spirit, Soul, Life, is in all things, it is the form of all things, directing and governing matter."

Forms are forever changing; what has been, in the vicissitude of things, becomes nothing. There must be something then, beyond the varying forms of Spirit; there must also be something beyond varying material forms.

There must be a Soul of the Universe which gives it unity. We must


Conclude that this exists wholly in the whole and in every part. To understand how this may be, let us borrow a metaphor from Plotinus: It is as a voice which is wholly throughout the whole of a room and in every part of it; it is wholly heard by all. Could it fill the whole universe, it would still be all in all.

It became a necessity with early medieval thinkers to posit various philosophical principles.


In a nugget of gold, for example, there is yellowness, hardness, etc.; but these qualities can be found elsewhere as well. They exist in unity within the nugget, and this inexplicable fact may be indicated by the word "substance." Later on, to support the doctrine of transubstantiation, they attributed an underlying, enduring reality that supports its accidents to substance. Substance was described as unalterable and ever the same with itself, with certain attributes ascribed to it.

