
1 Bradley, F.H., *Appearance and Reality*. Cf. Book II, chapters xi–xv.
3 Causa, Proem. Epist.
3 Ibid., Dial. IV.


I 34 GIORDANO BRUNO

It has been generally supposed that Bruno, following Cusanus, had some dim perception of the possibilities of a dialectic method when he wrote: "Profound magic is it to draw the contrary out after having discovered the point of union." Hegel, in his review of Bruno’s philosophy, found in this a great word. Schelling, too, discovered in Bruno a spirit akin to his own in his attempt to deduce the Universe logically from the point of union. However, it is very doubtful whether he had first-hand acquaintance with the Causa. Bruno's point of view seems closer to that of the thinker who today is in fashion for he is of the intuitive rather than of the logical, abstract school.

Bergson writes:


"Concepts, as we shall show elsewhere, generally go in couples and represent two contraries. There is hardly any concrete reality which cannot be observed from two opposing standpoints, which consequently can be subsumed under two antagonistic concepts. Hence a thesis and an antithesis which we endeavor in vain to reconcile logically, for the very simple reason that it is impossible, with concepts and observations taken from outside viewpoints, to make a thing. But from the object seized by intuition, we pass easily in many cases to the two contrary concepts; and, as in that way thesis and antithesis can be seen to spring from reality, we grasp at the same time how they are opposed and how they are reconciled."

Bruno writes: "It is one and the same series whereby Nature descends to the production of things and the intellect ascends to the cognition of them; and in both unity." 

Can sa, Dialog. V.

Hegel


G. W. F. Hegel, *Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie*, Band xv, pp. 224–244.

Schelling, F. W. J., *Bruno oder das Princip der Dinge*.

Bergson, H., *Introduction to Metaphysics*, trans. Haldane, 1913, p. 34.

Giordano Bruno

In his natural sense of reason, he believed the physician who cures is better than those who kill or torment. He was ready to employ forces that he did not understand, just as we use electricity today. He accepted much of what was considered miraculous as due to undiscovered natural causes. This is hinted at in his writing: "I am not now considering that necromancers do not hope to achieve much with the bones of the dead, believing these retain some vital activity."


The dialogue in the "Causa" is natural, even at its highest flights. Sometimes Bruno gives his readers breathing time with digressions, which are anything but restful. Every now and then, to press a point, he calls every auxiliary he can think of into his service; every kind of sacred writing, the lore of strange peoples and distant ages, is drawn upon. Any utterance, sacred or profane, in which he can detect a resemblance to his own views, is pounced upon and cited as authority. For there is a measure of truth in all things! Without any discrimination, he heaps together Mystics and Magi, the Cabala and Latin poets. Wonder-workers and wise men are referred to as of equal value. The effect on the modern reader is comic. Goldsmith must have come across him when he put Sanchoniathon, Manetho, Berosus, and Ocellus Lucanus into the mouth of the vendor of the gross green spectacles to Moses Primrose.


IV  
THE INFINITE UNIVERSE AND ITS WORLDS  

This work begins with a dedicatory letter to Castelnau, which contains much "self-revelation—words which he had not dared to write to one who knew him so well had they been other than strictly sincere." I wish, he writes, for the world to possess the glorious fruit of my labor, to awaken the soul and open the understanding of those deprived of that light which, most assuredly, is not mine own invention. Should I be in error, I do not believe I willfully go wrong. And in speaking and writing as I do, I am not contending through the desire of being victorious for I deem every kind of renown and conquest—God’s gift.


For foe,

vile and without a particle of honor in it

if it be not the truth; but, for love of true wisdom and in the effort to reflect aright,

I weary, I rack, I torment myself.

He will give his reasons for holding that the Universe endures, ever one and itself, in eternal flux throughout infinite space. From which contemplation, if we apply the mind, we shall neither be dismayed by the incidence of pain and dread nor exult in pleasure and hope; we shall pursue the path of right conduct, shall be large-minded observers of puerile thoughts, and shall behold greater matters than gods whom the vulgar adore. We shall secure clear-sighted contemplation of the course of nature, which is written in ourselves, and observe with even tenor.


Those divine laws which are graven in our hearts.

I. The same nature is to be found in the skies as here; so we may quit ourselves of the vain desire and stupid anxiety and hankering after distant good, for it is already at hand and with us. By means of this knowledge, we shall surely attain that well-being which we so vainly seek elsewhere.

2. The consideration of the Universe as the manifestation of God will set the human spirit free. Here is the philosophy that opens the senses, contents the soul, enlarges the mind, and brings true blessedness to man. For deeply considering the Being and Substance in which we are fixed, we find there is no such thing as death.

1 Infi n i to, Proem. Epist.
