2 Ibid. 138 GIORDANO BRUNO


For us alone, but for the true substance. Substance never diminishes but changes throughout infinite space. Since, in the vicissitudes of particular beings, we are all subject to the best Efficient Cause, we ought not to believe, think, or hope otherwise than that everything wholly derived from the good is good through good and to good. The contrary can only be held by one who understands nothing but what is immediately before him.

The beauty of an edifice is not to be judged from its smallest part but is most apparent to him who views the whole and the relation of part to part.

"Good and evil are contraries which, in fact, are eternally reconciled in the eternal core of being—the That Which intrinsically brings to pass the whole of reality, wherein we live."


In an earlier work, contraries are said to imply that which transcends appointed order and holds them in harmonious unity. God is above good and evil, but our highest conception of Him is as Good.

The Divine extols His own glory and sets forth the greatness of His sway, not in one sun, but in uncountable suns; not in one earth, but in worlds without end.

After the letter to Castelnau come three sonnets. All the new intellectual tendencies of the era are brought to a head, and the directions which science was to follow are pointed out in five dialogues. Bruno habitually introduces real people into his dialogues as interlocutors. In the first four of the *Infinite*, Filoteo expounds the Nolan philosophy to Girolamo Fracastoro, the humanist, and two other persons, one of whom is the indispensable pedant.

In the *Infinite, o ein*. Epistle, *Causa*, Dialogues II.


3 Officia de Immensitate, VI I I , VII, IX, X; Lain pas T. in Genita Statuam Amminis Opus Latum, II, pp. 211-218 Exodi, passim. For modern treatment of the concepts see Taylor, Prof. A. E., "Problems of Conduct," London, 1901, chap. VII. Infinito, Pio, Epistola 5. For Fracastoro, see Creswell, W. P., Memoirs (1805-1817) of Politianus et al. 

140 GIORDANO BRUNO


same kind.

---

Object  
"It is only a small part of Truth; it is as a mirror  
therein lies no certitude. The reports of sense may  
be brought into harmony by discursive thought—the understanding  
of Kant—which Bruno calls  
"reason." Still higher is intellect, which directs principles and draws from them their conclusions. Highest is a fourth faculty, mind,  
which is the proper and living form of truth,  
and is none other than direct insight or intuition or immediate apprehension, beholding its contents in an immediate comprehensive whole."

We shall find in later works that this crown of enquiry is an experience in which we share,  
in our feeble measure,  
that of the Godhead, and he allows the rare experiences of Plotinus and the Mystics to be of the same kind.


Same essential nature.

2. His temerity is unbounded; he strikes out a perilous path to his conclusions. God’s power, he says, is infinite; therefore, his works also must be infinite. For the agent would be imperfect if his works did not fulfill his power. Infinite power, then, must have an infinite effect. Our imagination, too, which is a shadow of the real, forbids anything but infinity. However, we must remember that in that infinity as it is for itself, all particulars are one.


" It is no more an infinite man than it is an infinite ass." As "carries many implications for Bruno, as we shall see later on. More convincing, perhaps, are other arguments which may be quickly summarized. Our sense-perception is limited and changes with change of position; but we can appeal to reason, which shows all the observations of sense to be entirely relative, as are constructions based on them.

1. Infinito, Dial., I, beginning.
2. Exoi ei, P.I, Dial., II, after Ganz. xi and xv; P.II, Dial., I, vi after Ganzi; Di al., IV, after Cane. 71.
3. Infinitolo, Dial., II, end.

WORKS PRINTED IN LONDON 141: Here is where I stand (my new is what I immediately experience). Position and motion in space (and time) must


It can be conceived as relative to any point we choose for comparison. In the Universe, there is no center or circumference; instead, the center is everywhere, and every part is outside some other part.

In all this, may we not detect some glimmering, primitive perception—a feeble germ of an idea that has been developed by Lorentz and others into the revolutionary "Principle of Relativity"? Bruno lived too early for science to be sufficiently advanced for him to pursue his thought. He believes that although he cannot reach the Transcendent Absolute, he can rise above sense and its interpretations to grasp the real conditions under which the World-Soul experiences its vicissitudes.

