As far as sense goes, it reveals spatial continuity, and so it should be interpreted. All positions and all shapes are contained in space and bounded by space; if that which contains has no limit, then neither will the contained: if space is infinite, so too is matter.


Bruno's certainty about the infinity of the universe was not accepted by his younger contemporaries Galileo and Kepler. The latter, who refers to him by name, inclined strongly towards the opposite view, perhaps for religious reasons. The judicious Galileo wrote: “Reason and my mental powers do not enable me to conceive either finitude or infinitude.” He also stated: “No one has proved the world to be finite and determinate or infinite and indeterminate.”

1. Infinito, Dial. V.
2 Ibid., Dial. I. Cf. De Immenso.


I,  
3 Kepler, Johann; Op. Omn. ed. C. Frisch, vol. VI, pp. 137-8.

Burton writes in his *Anatomy of Melancholy*: "Kepler will by no means admit Bruno's infinite worlds."

2 Galileo, G. *Lettera a F. Ingoli*.

5 Ibid., *Diálogo de los máximos sistemas*. — Cfr. Tocco, Le Op. Lat. di G. B., 1889, p. 380.

**142 GIORDANO BRUNO**

Bruno grasped the general principle of the relativity of knowledge. In this work, he demonstrates the relativity of sense; in *Spaccio*, he will point out the relativity of morals in *De Monade*.


In this text, it will be demonstrated that there is no absolute measure for either time or space. The assertion of the relativity of knowledge claims to be absolutely true knowledge. Bruno goes further than such a claim; although assured, it is not modest. The contradictions involved in conceptual time and space were recognized even then. However, Bruno unhesitatingly grasped one horn of the dilemma: for him, the other horn did not exist. In infinity, thought out, there is no measure, no proportion, no comprehensible number; he says this. Yet he has just argued from mathematical conceptions to physical reality. For him, space is an actually boundless continuity—an endless field for the motion of an actually endless number of solar systems—and it is filled with ether. He writes of the "corporeal infinite," which is the simulacrum of the First Principle.


---

3 As the actual, existent being. He distinguishes between the containing and the contained, between space as room to move in, the condition for motion, and the ether which occupies room; but, in positing an infinite ether as occupying infinite space, he clearly asserts absolute position in space, or, in the language of the generation preceding our own, that space is absolute. This question is under dispute.

4 He perceives that continuity is quite a different thing from infinity. Refer to: Infini to Dial. II, III; De Mm., II, viii.


2  
I bid, Dial I.  

3  
I bid, Ch' Di I mm IV.  

4  
I bid, Dial I, Ch' Di I mm, vii, v. 3, 4; 10-13 and s chol.

5  
Ch' Russell, the Hon. B: Position in Time and Space, Mind, 1901; Ponn Datations of Geometry, chaps. ii A,


Giordano Bruno  
Space

There are countless suns and an infinity of planets which circle around their respective suns as our seven planets circle around our Sun.

1. Particles are incessantly shot out through space from one world to another and from one body to another; bodies are a composition of these particles.

2. He tells us that each heavenly body, being animate,


Moves by its own intimate energy. The moon is an Earth, and our Earth, seen from the Moon, would appear as a luminous disc, just as the Moon does to us.

“It is not unreasonable to suppose that there are planets which orbit other stars, unnoticed due to great distance or small mass, or because they do not reflect much water on their surface.” He speaks of the World-Soul as an animal, the all-sustainer of worlds which themselves are souls and contain souls. Some of these worlds may be higher or lower than ours, with plants and minerals in space akin to those on our Earth or different.

