We can attribute life to other worlds with better reason than we can to our own Earth.

He had the merit of perceiving that comets have a regular course and are bodies not altogether different from planets. Some of his speculations are very remarkable; they read like intuitive forecasts of modern discovery, such as: The sun...


Heat is produced by similar causes to those which produce heat on Earth; light emanates from the atmosphere immediately surrounding the Sun. The Sun has its own motion, and some of these stars may revolve around others as planets do. There are stars that cannot be seen due to their great distance.

Infinite, Dial III.
Ibid., Dial II, IV.
Ibid., Dial III, JV.
Ibid., Dial IV. In fact, he thought they revolved around the Sun.
He supposes solar heat radiates outward only; the sun is a...


Relatively cold, dark body.  
3  
Infinite, Di al III.  

**WORKS**  
~ Printed in London 145

Bodies decay and give place, in time,  
to new formations; their particles are in constant motion;  
and the fixed stars  
are really in motion.

He accounts for the phenomenon of cohesion by the presence of water.

Possibly the difficulty of accounting for the phenomena of light, heat, and meteors was one of the reasons which induced Bruno to adopt the theory of indecomposable atoms or prime bodies of which all worlds are really made up. These atoms are always in incessant movement, passing from body to body and from world to world; they are forever entering or leaving some combination of themselves.


This reads almost like a dim prophecy of the discovery of radioactivity; and the disappearance of the ether, if not temporary, will necessitate a very serious modification of the undulatory theory of light. A great part of the Infinite is given over to vigorous attacks on Aristotle’s limited conceptions of the Universe. Bruno's arguments are acute, and many of them are destructive; but they sound strange today: the work of Galileo and Newton brushed them aside. Two of them may serve as examples of the remainder.

Aristotle had imagined spheres of water, air, and fire surrounding the Earth. Bruno points out that there is no evidence for the existence of these spheres. On the contrary, the evidence is all the other way; the elements are all mixed.


Together;  
there is air in the earth, and hot and cold springs prove the presence of water in the rocks. Fire leaps forth from the mountains.

An argument employed by Aristotle against infinity was:  
- Infini te, Proem. Epist.
- Ibid., Dial. II.
- Ibid., Dial. III, V.
- Ibid., Dial. III.
- Ibid., Dial. III, IV.
- Aristotle De Caelo.

The center of the earth is the hottest part of it; for being an animal, this must be so to sustain its vitality (De Anima III, K 146).  

GIORDANO BRUNO


That heavy bodies move down;  
light bodies, up;  
therefore, there would be infinite lightness and infinite heaviness in  
an infinite universe. Bruno shows that the phenomena of upward and downward motion are determined by relations of situation between bodies. What appears to us as an upward motion towards the moon would appear to an inhabitant of the Moon as a fall towards his own globe.

All this is acutely argued, but Bruno's cosmology is less reasoned construction than leaps towards truth; many of them reach it. The most powerfully logical mind may wander far from truth: by innate disposition, education, habit, or prejudice, it is apt to incline towards wrong paths. It was Bruno’s strength that in the main, he had an instinct as to.


