The right direction. And it is to such an instinct that success is most likely to fall. He was ahead of his time in emphasizing the need for observation and experiment, abstraction, and comparison.

"Why turn to vain fancies when there is experience itself to teach us?"

He retains a lively recollection of the Calvinists of Geneva and other Protestants he had come across. He has a word to say on the doctrine of predestination and its moral effect.

In God, since to make is the same as to be made, free will and necessity are the same; but for man they are partial, yet valid aspects. Theology is right in maintaining that the will is free, for man is not the same as God, though supported in His immanence. Men misconceive absolute truth. Antecedent determination is not basal truth. Fractally to will and to be free are one and the same, and man possesses a measure of freedom.

The rude and ignorant are wholly unable to understand election, dignity, and the merits of justice, whence predestination, filling them with...


Assurance or desperation, they become very vile. While I inform you, Dialogues II.

1  
I bind, Dialogue II.  

2  
I bind, Dialogue III.  

3  
I bind, Dialogue I.  

148 GIORDANO BRUNO

THE EXPULSION OF THE TRIUMPHANT BEAST, PROPOSED BY Jove, EFFECTED BY THE COUNCIL, REVEALED BY Mercury, RELATED BY Sophia, HEARD BY Salino, AND SET DOWN BY The Nolan; Divided into Three Dialogues, Each of Three Parts.

In an "Explanatory Letter to Sidney," Bruno tells him that this work is introductory to another, which shall be a treatise on moral philosophy according to the inner light, which the divine intellectual sun has illuminated and illuminates in me. He wishes the present work to be read in this context.


A broad, generous, uncarping spirit: the author must not be taken too assertively; he introduces interlocutors who speak for themselves and report the judgments of many others, equally full of their own convictions, expressing them with fervor and zeal, and emphatically, in their own character.

The book recalls Lucian’s “Parliament of the Gods,” convened to expel deities introduced by the barbarians; it was probably suggested by this classic as well as by a work of Niccolò Franco. It is crammed with...


Fragments from Bruno's vast reading are a testament to the strength of his memory. He quotes from Ariosto, Tasso, and Dante Alighieri, indicating that he was well-versed in their works. The dialogue primarily features Sophia (Wisdom) and Saulino, a relative on his mother’s side, with Mercury making an appearance as well. The general form is discussed in Spaccio, Epist. Explic., Oeconomia, and Dialogo nel Gange Sanio con la sua Dama della Virtù, 1539.

The author was accused of being a Pasquinade by Pope Pius V in 1563. See reference to the work by Fiorentino for further details, p. 44.

WORKS PRINTED IN LONDON 1491

The piece is allegorical: It recounts how "repentant Jove," after enjoying youth for many years, indulged in wild ramblings and became preoccupied with various affairs.


Of arms and love. But now, being tamed, he begins to decline in his wantonness and vices, losing the diversions and entertainments of youth and manhood. He “begins to advance in years and admits none unto his council but such as have snowy heads and furrowed brows; those who have learned to be thoughtful, prudent, continent, forgetful of affronts, and have acquired general, practical wisdom.”

2 Jove stands for each one of us, for every man is ultimate reality individualized as a living spirit, which rules over a microcosm. Man passes through a period of sensual enjoyment and passion into years that bring the philosophical mind. But Jove also represents the changes that take place in collective humanity; he is the Zeitgeist. He swears a great oath that virtue shall reign in heaven. The goddess of love proposes a ball to celebrate the victory of the Gods over the Titans, but Jove resolves to hold a grand Council of the Gods instead. These Olympian deities are our good and evil qualities personified. Jupiter seats himself on his throne and announces his determination.


To purge the sky of its beastly impurities, the constellations—such as the Bear, the Dragon, the Lion, and the Hydra—all represent brutal vices that must be replaced by virtues which are their contraries. It should not be forgotten that the revolving heavens were universally believed to cooperate in determining the character and lives of men; nor that Bruno had achieved an enlarged conception of this belief. These beliefs survived so long as the present century, even if now extinct. The late learned Richard Garnett wrote in its support.


5.0 GIORDANO BRUNO

Of the inhabitants of space, he believed them, along with men of his time, to be a society of spirits. The assembled gods ratify Jove's decision, and the sky is forthwith purged of its beasts and ancient signs, one by one. Each is replaced, after much discussion, by the symbol of some quality conducive to good behavior. By an adroit stroke, Momus, the god of ridicule, is made to act as jester to the Olympian Court, allowing Bruno to express ideas that are not to be taken too assertively.

Sometimes, he also attracts attention to novel thoughts through Momus.


Over-emphasis or exaggeration. Momus is forever jesting; he is the spirit that denies through mockery, speaking with an earnest spirit masked in humor. There is something of Lucian, Voltaire, Ibsen, and Shaw in him; he embodies both the spirit of humor and dissatisfaction—an inner illumination observing progress in reform and finding relief in bitter jest.

