A tumultuous throng of ideas surges to find expression, hence the allegory is not systematic or always well sustained. Bruno’s real conviction has to be extracted from a hundred odd, fantastic, and dispersed imaginations. For his ideas rush forth like winds escaped from the cave of Aeolus. It would be interesting to know how Sidney, whose wit was the measure of congruity, took the work dedicated to him.

Allied vices are grouped together in the same constellation and replaced by virtues more or less related.


To each other and the contraries of the vices to be expelled; for “the beginning, middle, and end of the birth, growth, and perfection of whatever we behold is from contraries, by contraries, and to contraries. Wherever there is contrariety, there is action and reaction; there is motion.

Giordano Bruno: Rabelais would bore most readers but for his indecorum, and no man could ever batter himself into the enjoyment of those peculiar turns of thought and treatment which Bruno takes; he must be born a Brunian. The thinker’s torrential rush of ideas and words swerves hither and thither; his metaphors are often fantastic, whimsical, extravagant; he scorns moderation; he knows not the meaning of reserve. Not merely does he play on a thought with all possible variations, but he splashes words about with rich enjoyment.


The text describes a writer who piles words on words, often for emphasis or because he recognizes the multiple facets of every fact and desires to convey complete meaning. However, he never learned the lesson of simple directness taught by Boccaccio, nor did he try to imitate the clear prose of Tasso. Worse still, he fell into a fashionable vice of his time: translating classics directed attention to the power lying latent in every word; they discovered the richness of modern speech and some thought that a sonorous and pompous display of words was impressive, even when almost identical. Bruno marshalled whole battalions of ineffective synonyms and was happy when he had decorated an idea with "verbal ruffles and frills." He would seem to have known that his style was apt to sprawl.


**The Gods, after much humorous debate concerning each holder of a constellation who typifies certain human vices, eject them and seat corresponding virtues in their place. The Little Bear, occupying the fixed center of the revolving sky, has stood for Falsity, Hypocrisy, and allied vices. Let Truth, which follows Reality, take his place and preside.

"The act of Divine Knowledge is the substance of the being of all things; therefore, all things not like ours follow things but are before all things and are everything."

Since our knowledge is imperfect, we must be careful how we give liberty to the vulgar to read what they please and form their own opinions.**


**Conclusion:**

Certain books, like theological texts, should not be read by those who are ignorant, as they might become wicked and receive harmful instruction. 

1. All that is pernicious to society, enslaving dogmas, and anything that fetters the mind—such as the altar of superstition, ignorance, violence, conspiracy, cruelty, etc.—are to be banished. In their place, prudence, courage, law, diligence, and humanity are to reign.

The proper organization and conduct of society is the aim of morals; therefore, no laws that do not contribute to perfecting human interactions should be acknowledged.

3. The test of a supposed virtue is how it works in practice. For example, chastity should be examined based on its effects.


Into a "gallant, humane, affable, and hospitable!" Of herself, she is neither virtue nor vice; nor does she contain any goodness, dignity, or merit. When she yields to any urgent reason, she is called continence and has the being of virtue as partaking in such fortitude and contempt of pleasure that it is not vain and useless but improves human society and honest satisfaction for others.

Filled with the spirit of the Renaissance, though possessed by a moral earnestness which scarcely belonged to it, he was "a citizen and intimate of the world; son of father Sol and mother Earth," as he calls himself, quoting Tasso. He was all for quaffing the deepest draughts of life. He perceived that moral practice is not under unalterably fixed law: it is relative. Like Plato, he did not think social sexual arrangements were perfect. Perchance Jove may restore.

References:
1. Spaccio
2. Ibi d.


I.  
Bi d.  

I I, i. Bi d.  

I II, i.  
5 Bi d.  

Epist. Explicit. 154  
GIORDANO BRUNO

That natural law by which every man is allowed to have as many wives as he can maintain and impregnate; and he supports this bold suggestion with the fallacious argument of increasing population.


1. "We call those virtues which, by a certain trick and custom, are so named and believed, though their effects and fruits are condemned by all sense and natural reason; such as open knavery and folly, the malignity of usurping laws and possessors of wealth and tall men; the strongest being the most rightful possessor, and he who is most worthy is the one most solicitous, most industrious, and the first occupant of those gifts and parts of the earth which Nature—and consequently God—gives to all indifferently."

2. We almost might be reading modern propaganda! Here and there, he drops in a philosophical sentence. There is an eternal Principle or Substance that is truly the man and not an accident derived from composition. This is the deity, the hero, the particular god, the intelligence through which different complexes and bodies are formed and form themselves, so that it continually reappears in different species, names, and fortunes.


"The Soul, which is the eternal basis and meaning of souls, does not change and cannot become subject to dissolution; but in body and experience there is nothing but vicissitude. God, considered absolutely, has nothing to do with us, but only as He communicates Himself by the effects of Nature, to which he is more nearly allied than Nature itself; so that if he is not Nature itself, certainly he is the Nature of Nature and the Soul of the World, if he is not the very soul itself."
