
"5 Bruno, if he does not go so far as a certain modern philosopher."  

1 Spaccio, Dial. I, i.
2 Ibid., Dial.
3 Ibid., Epist. Explic. 
4


I bid you, Epistle I, Section 33.

I bid you,

111,
15

GIORDANO BRUNO

of rule,  
to the forcible suppression of all competing forms  
of faith. Bruno valued Christianity above all religious systems because it proclaimed the doctrine of love: it was a religion that began, increased, and maintained itself with the raising of the dead, the healing of the sick, and self-sacrifice for others. Yet, in some respects, he found Paganism superior. It was more tolerant, nearer to Nature, and he thought it had a profounder metaphysical basis.


"Those wise men knew that God was in things, and that the divinity lay hidden in Nature, shining and discovering itself differently in different subjects, making them partakers of itself. From whence, with magical and divine rites, they mounted by the same ladder of Nature to the very height of Divinity, which descended to the meanest and lowest things through its own communication. But what I think most deplorable is that I see some senseless and foolish idolaters who no more imitate the excellence of the Egyptian worship than the shadow partakes in the nobility of the body. They look for Divinity, without any manner of reason, in the excrements of dead and inanimate things. And what is worse than all this, they triumph with joy to see their own foolish rites in such great reputation while those of others have vanished and been annulled.

Divinity has, is, and will be present in diverse subjects, however mortal they may be."


A mistake is to suppose that the wise Egyptians worshipped "crocodiles, cocks, onions, and turnips." They only adored "the Divinity" therein. You ought not to count this an evil, for animals and plants are the living effects of Nature, which you must know, is no other than God in things. The Greeks, too, did not worship Jupiter as such.  
1 S Pacchioni, III, ii.  
2 Ibi d., III, i.  
3


Sometimes Bruno refers to Christians when he speaks of Greeks. Probably there is a veiled allusion to the nature of the Divinity of Christ in this passage.

**Works Printed in London 57**

"If they had been the Divinity, but they worshipped the Divinity as if it had been Jupiter for all the Gods were once really men. And seeing excellent majesty, justice, and magnanimity in a man, they presumed there was a magnanimous, just, and bountiful God within him or at least the Divinity which communicated itself in such a manner by the name of Jupiter."

Bruno’s religion was metaphysical and mystical; he was so strongly imbued with Neo-Platonic thought that he found himself in sympathy with all kinds of faith when philosophically interpreted.


"But Catholic Christianity, which owed so much to Neo-Platonising theologians in the fifth and sixth centuries and to the systematizing of Alexandrian speculations by the schoolmen, was further endeared to him by early education and habit. The authority of Rome had, until lately, been recognized in the political constitution and laws of the great Western peoples whom it had welded into some sort of union; so it had a strong claim on him as a formal faith. He was always willing to hand over to theology the contemplation of the Divinity as transcending the infinite universe if he might make an independent study of Nature, with freedom allowed him to form his own conclusions therefrom.

However, as the field of knowledge is enlarged, the demesne of Theology is apt to be encroached upon. The incompatibility of systematic knowledge with dogma is progressively discernible in Bruno’s writings. Yet he thought adjustment within the Church was possible."


If it would give a twist to its doctrines and accept synthetic development. As a Catholic, he pours scorn on irreconcilable Reformers with their new-fangled dogmas and hide-bound forms. Especially does he reprobate those who hold to salvation by faith, despise works, and think “doing good and abstaining from evil does not render them acceptable to God; but only hoping and believing according to their catechism.”

“Among ten kinds of such teachers there is not to be found one who has not formed to himself a Catechism ready to be published to the world, if not already published, approved.” — Giordano Bruno  
1 Spaccio, III  
2 Causa, Dial. IV. 15-8


In no other institution but his own did he find solace; in all others, there was something to consider, disapprove, or doubt. Moreover, the majority disagreed with themselves, blurring what they had written yesterday.

Bruno advocated for tolerance but perceived a threat to society whenever an individual, however unqualified, claimed sole possession of truth and sought to coerce others into submission to their opinions.

While he despised Protestant sectaries, he was equally critical of his own Church's faults. He objected to ecclesiastical authority enforcing rigid dogmas that it either did not understand or misinterpreted. The practical end of religion should not be burdened with subtle and valueless theological speculations. Bruno remained faithful to truth like a needle to the pole, disregarding personal advantage and even safety.
