
He expected to return soon with Castelnau to a country suppressing freedom in religious thought and speech when he put into the mouth of Momus a scoff that is not hard to understand: the fate of the centaur Chiron is under debate—a being made up of two natures.


And two substances concur in one hypostatical union. 

Momus, answered Jupiter, "The mystery of this thing is great and occult, and you cannot comprehend it; therefore, you ought only to believe it as a thing too high and great for you, and you should not desire to pry into it."

Bruno was a Modernist of the 16th century. He thought the Catholic position needed reform, similar to how priests of Diana should be less ready to exalt their office and mysterious function.


Revisions and restatements:  
Those qualified to think freely should be free to do so. He believes neither in a universal deluge nor in the recent creation of man. He cannot credit that the various races of men descended from a single pair; if so, it must have been by some miracle like that by which Jonah had a marvelous voyage—“a handsome way of transporting men by some blast of wind or some passage of whales, that have swallowed persons in one country and gone to spew them alive in other parts and upon other continents.” Such biblical miracles are absurd, as are those of the saints, and much doctrine taught by the Church. Momus declares that Orion, “who can walk upon the waves of the sea without sinking or wetting his feet; and consequently can likewise do a great many other pretty…”


"Shall be sent among men," and let us order him to teach them everything he pleases, making them believe black is white and that human understanding, when it thinks it sees best, is mere blindness. Let him convince them that what appears to reason as good, excellent, and choice is base, wicked, and extremely evil; that Nature is a whorish baggage, and Natural Law is knavery. He should make them believe that Nature and the Divinity cannot concur to the same good end. That the justice of one is not subordinate to the justice of the other, but are things as contrary to one another as light is to darkness; that the entire Divinity is Mother of the Greeks, and like a hard stepmother to all other generations, whence none can be acceptable to the Gods but by becoming Greek. For the greatest Russian or Poltroon...


Who lived in Greece is said to be allied to the generation of Socrates. This person is incomparably better than the most just and magnanimous who could come from Rome, however preferable in manners, sciences, valor, judgment, beauty, and authority; because these are natural gifts and therefore despised by the Gods, and left to those who are not.


Capable of greater privileges; that is, those supernatural ones which Divinity gives, such as dancing on the waters, making lobsters sing ballads, cripples cut capers, and moles see without spectacles, and other fine gallantries without number.

1. Let them persuade withal, that all philosophy, all contemplation, and all magic, which may make them like us, is nothing but bagatelle; that all heroic acts are nothing but knight-errantry; that ignorance is the finest science in the world because it is acquired without labour and pains, and keeps the mind free from melancholy.

2. One can hardly wonder, after reading this, that Bruno should request not to be taken too assertively and inform his reader that the personages in the book speak sincerely, but in their own proper character.

3. None the less, he exhibits considerable courage in such free criticism of what


That he could do so in England, especially attack Protestantism in a land which had at least broken away from Rome, testifies to the liberty she enjoyed. Bruno satirizes the belief in particular interventions of Providence and holds it foolish, unworthy, profane, and injurious to imagine that the gods seek reverence, fear, love, worship, and respect from men for any other good advantage or end than that of men themselves, being most glorious.

All these wonders may be found paralleled in those of the *Acta Sanctorum*, as collated by J. Bollandus, cont. 1734–1894. The Greeks are, of course, not Christians, while the Romans stand for the enlightened nations of antiquity and for enlightenment generally.

Spaccio, III,


I

3  
I bid,  
Epist. Explic.

4  
I,  
i i  
i  

L  
162 GIORDANO BRUNO  
in themselves and not capable of receiving any glory from without.

“Give a blow,” says Jupiter, “to all prophets, diviners, fortune-tellers, and prognosticators, and all such as traverse and run about to spoil my progress.”

He expresses contempt for “altars and statues erected to certain persons whom I am ashamed to name because they are worse than our satyrs, fauns, and other half-beasts—viler even.”


The Crocodiles of Egypt.

3. Bruno has a fling at current Christianity, Judaism (for some reason or other he detested Jews), and Mohammedanism: all are useful and valid but contain distortions of philosophical truth. He has no belief in a Garden of Eden or the sweet Age of Gold. He foreshadows our modern knowledge of the evolution of humanity: in the Golden Age, men were not more virtuous than the beasts at present are virtuous; and perhaps they were more stupid than many of the beasts.
