
4. But he derived this view from Lucretius. Nor was this his sole indebtedness to the great Latin poet. He adopted the theory of “atoms—imperishable physical identities—which Lucretius drew through Epicurus from Leucippus and Democritus. And the consideration of physical individuals must have led him on to ponder, if he had not done so before, on the problem of individual...


Soul's Question: Is there atomic personality from his first works to his last? He insists on the One Soul of the World, which is the unfolding of the Absolute to itself. But, in and for the Divine mind, there are centers of experience. In every man, in each individual, a world, a universe regards itself.

Is each center of experience a permanent, inexhaustible energy? Are souls immortal, even as is the Absolute? 

1. Spaccio, II, i.
2. Epist., II, iii.


I bid.

I,

i.

4

I bid.  
I I I,  
i i ; Calabria, Diaphantus I.

5  

I bid.,  
I I I,  
i.

6  

I bid., Epistle Explicit.

Giordano Bruno  
It may not be true, but it seems at least likely according to the opinion of Pythagoras. The answer is a riddle which maybe


Here, in the excerpt, "he suggests that if not to be believed, it is gravely to be pondered whether a vile life be not disposed of by fatal justice, interwoven in a prison-house suited to its failure or crime, with organs and instruments suitable for such a workman or craftsman."

And again: Let us supplicate the Divinity to bestow happy geniuses upon us in our transfusion, passage, or metempsychosis since, however inexorable he be, we must attend him with wishes, to be either preserved in our present state or to enter into a better, or one like, or one but a little worse. He that is favored by the Gods must obtain this by means of good wishes and good actions.

We may be sure that Bruno did not accept Pythagorean doctrine in a crude and vulgar form. He employs it, just as he employs Catholic dogma, not by way of dodge, but in a meaningful manner.


The sincere belief that various adumbrations of Truth must be adapted to various grades of illumination results in his own inner meaning being lost in obscurity. Pythagoreanism is far from removing the dread of Orcus and greedy Charon, which he had promised to take away.

3  
But, cooperating with his Neo-Platonism and belief in hidden sympathies in Nature, such facts as the reappearance of ancestral qualities, vital similarities in widely differing species, and innate tendencies would naturally lead him on to vague speculation in order to explain them.

4  
1 Doc. xi

i  
Cf. Ovid; Metam., l. xv.

2 Spaccio, Epist. Expl. Compare page 179.

3 Casa, Proem. Epist.

