Giordano Bruno

Cusanus’ "Learned Ignorance," which commends ardent search for truth while encouraging a critical spirit and demonstrating the impossibility of reaching truth as it really is.

Cornelius Agrippa’s work “On the Uncertainty and Vanity of All Knowledge” was very popular.


1 The lighter touches in "Cabala del Cava llo Pegaso" probably owe something to the perusal of Erasmus’ “Praise of Folly.” Part of its title is taken from the Jewish Cabala, a medley, in part, of Jewish, Neo-Platonic, and Pythagorean mysticism. The work is gravely dedicated to a mythical personage, the Bishop of Casamarciano, an obscure little place in Italy, and commences with a satiric letter. This is followed by a sonnet in praise of the ass:

“O holy donkeydom, holy ignorance, holy foolishness, and pious devotion, who alone can so perfect the heart that human capacity and study may not improve it! Thou dost not employ the weary painstaking of any art or discovery, nor the study of the skies where thou has built thy home. Of what worth is study to us, O prying folk, to desire knowledge of the works of nature, or if the stars are indeed earth, fire...”


And sea! Holy donkeydom does not concern itself with such matters, but with folded hand and on bended knee, awaits what God shall send. Nothing endures, save the fruit of eternal repose, which God only gives when we are buried.

An address to the reader comes next, in the form of a pulpit exhortation: We must strive with all our might to become asses if we are not yet in that state of grace and persevere in our asinity if we have reached it. So shall ye find yourselves written in the Book of Life, obtain grace in the Church Militant and glory in that Church Triumphant wherein God dwells and reigns forever and ever. So be it.

A very pious sonnet follows on the Ass and its foal.


It was translated into English by James Sanford in 1569.

**WORKS PRINTED IN LONDON 1569**

Bruno has now given the motif of the work. The dialogues which follow are filled with bitter irony and merciless satire, interspersed with very serious thought. No one wielded a more incisive lash or knew better how to apply it. Sometimes he becomes unduly violent; but often, when he is girding with a sardonic grin, it changes into a laughing smile or takes on noble severity. His object is to destroy the notion that ignorance and superstitious belief and fear are requisite in true religion; he would away with the pretentious simplicity of pietists and the empty mysticism, stupidity, and obstinacy which render religion synonymous with obscurantism. He shows that Scripture has been misused to glorify ignorance; as if the world, that wonderful open book, were not also the work of God. He lashes the hypocrite. But ignorance is by no means confined to the Church. It is to be found among philosophers, whether they be Pyrrhonists or Aristotelians, and also among those who pin their blind faith on authority. In fact


The ass is to be found everywhere: in the church, the cloister, the law-courts, and the schools. Asiatic influence is as widespread as the Soul of the World. However, true religion and true philosophy must not be confused with foolish superstition or supreme ignorance.

There are three short dialogues. In the first, Saulino reappears and engages in lively conversation with Sibaso and Coribante, a pedant. In the second dialogue, which is divided into three parts, a new interlocutor is introduced: Onorio. Like the heroes of Lucian and Apuleius, he has been an ass and endured much through many transformations. He once served a gardener, being laden with vegetables for Thebes' market; later, he dragged charcoal. Then he became a steed of the Pegasus type, serving the gods in that happy region where is the fountain which gushed forth when the hoof of the...


I GIOVANNI BRUNO

The steed struck the earth and which Apollo consecrated to the Muses. In the course of his metempsychoses, he has occupied the body of Aristotle himself! It is splendid fooling; all that may impede the progress of human knowledge is treated with withering scorn. The third dialogue has only a few lines. A messenger from Sebas informs Saulino that his master's wife is dead; he must act as her executor, and therefore, further discussion is to be postponed. Moreover, Coribante has the gout, and Onorio has gone away to take the waters.

Bruno recurs again and again to Pythagoreanism.

SEB: Do you hold that the soul of man is substantially the same as that of beasts, and that the only difference is one of form?

ONOR: That of man is the same in its specific and generic essence with that of flies, oysters, plants, and everything which lives or has a soul. It is not matter, which it possesses in a more or less lively way—there is a thorough permeation of Spirit in itself. Now, the aforementioned Spirit, by fate or providence, order or chance, unites itself...


To this or that kind of body, and, by reason of difference in structure or members, reaches different grades and perfections of faculty and act. Hence, that spirit or soul, which was in the spider and possessed its industry, claws, and members of a certain number, mass, and shape, united with human seed, acquires another intelligence, instruments, postures, and deeds.

Just before, Onorio has declared that, from experience and memory, he knows the doctrine of Pythagoras and the Druids as to metempsychosis to be most assuredly true. It will be noticed that, in the quotation given above, Bruno has observed the importance of organs to function. In another interesting digression, he points out the important part played by the hand in giving man his position.

*Source: Cabala, Dial. II, i*


---

At the beginning.

172 GIORDANO BRUNO

finds that he has to observe the difficult regulation of remaining silent for the space of two years. Mercury takes pity on the unhappy beast, bestows on him the gift of eloquence, and transforms him into a dogmatic pedant.

Be at home with all, scamper about with all, be the brother of all, identify yourself with them, rule them, be themselves.

The innocent beast is no such ass as not to want to know something. "Tell me, sir," he asks, and help me a little.
