
5. The innermost being of God is not reached, even by the mystic. Bruno is the first thinker who based the soul’s duty to itself on its own nature: not on external authority, but on inner light.

6. He leaves theology to itself and is not here  
1 Eroi ci


Argumento del Nolan o.  
2 Eroici, P. I, Dial. II; P. II, Dial. II.  
3 Spaccio, Epist. Esplicita.  
4 Eroici, P. II, Dial. II.  
5 L'infinito, P. I, Dial. II, III; P. II, Dial. IV.  
6 Spaventa, B.; op. cit., p. 143.

176 GIORDANO BRUNO

And all is intermingled with observations alien to the purpose in hand and even with personal reminiscences. But obscurity charmed the "intellectuals" of the era; they found no entertainment more agreeable or mentally stimulating than moral conundrums—the more quaint and singular, the better. Bruno certainly succeeds in reviving...


Any flagging of attention due to the change of interlocutors; brisk and natural dialogue, surprise, and unexpected digression.

He would have the service of the soul directed "to the fountain of the Ideas, the ocean of all truth and goodness." The Infinite, being infinite, must be infinitely pursued. 

The pursuit of Natural Knowledge is a most exquisite means of endowing the human soul with an heroic temper. For there are stages in the contemplation of the Divine Love and Wisdom. But, cast back into the body and bound by the body, the soul is not always in progress.

It must then arouse itself and make a new intrepid attempt; first through desire, next by attention, then by study, and lastly by being filled with loving enthusiasm. And though we can...


Never attain the divine infinity of Power, Love, and Knowledge, we can share in its blessedness. Bruno makes his start with an impulse of intellectual passion and treats of the upward ascent which the intellect must traverse to reach a right comprehension of God manifest in Nature. He makes Tansillo utter an "Apologia pro vita sua":

"That which has no splendor beyond bodily charm is worthy only of that form of love which has the perpetuation of the race for its object. Methinks it is piggish to enquire or bother about it." For my own part, I was never more infatuate about such matters than I am after canzoni 20 and 23.

Cfr., Spaccio, III, ii, 21. Vid., P.I, Dial. IV, Tansillo loq., after canz. 20 and canz. 23.


---

3 I bid. P.I., Dial.V.

WORKS PRINTED IN LONDON 177

Now about any picture or statue to which I may be indifferent:

1 “The contrary is the reason why its opposite is hankered after and enjoyed.”

2 “But the wise hold all mutable things as if they were not, and affirm them to be vanity.”

3 Sense would live according to sensible things, after its own manner; but there are other laws.

4 He who would aim at the imperishable object must rise, by heroic effort, above matter, flesh, and the transitory things of earth.

5 —The fullness of knowledge must be united with a burning passion for that which is both love and truth. The desire to comprehend is the soul’s home-sickness which causes it to soar aloft for true wisdom and joy; it does not avoid, nay,


It voluntarily seeks the path of suffering, the "Gethsemane of the soul," which shall lead it to true beauty—the ultimate harmony and conformity of all things.

There are two kinds of ecstasy that may be reached by the divinely transported: 

1. The abstraction of passive mystics, who usually are ignorant folk, into whom the divine sense enters as it were into an empty room.
2. Those who are filled with intellectual ardor, which spurs them to constructive activity, so that, by rational process, the spirit becomes godlike in contact with its divine object.
