
"The first kind possess more dignity, power, and efficacy in themselves; the second kind are worthier, more powerful, efficacious, and divine. The first are worthy as is the..."


"Those who bear the sacraments are regarded as sacred. The experience of the mystic has empirical value, but philosophy deals with the rational. To Bruno, philosophy and science were akin to music.

1 Eroici, P.I., Dial.II, at end.
2 Ibid., after canz. 9
cfr. Spaccio, I, i.
3 Loc. cit. Eroici, P.I., Dial.IV, after sonnet 22.
5 Ibid., P.II, Dial.II."


I bid., P. II, Dial. III, fol. xi.i 7  
I bid., P. I, Dial. III, at beginning.

3 Cfr. Senzi ni, T.; op. cit., p. 19.

78 GIORDANO BRUNO

Apollo’s lute. He pursued them with the passion of a lover. He holds that once intellectual love is aroused, nothing else will really satisfy.

We are indeed bound to the body and restricted by our vegetative life; but our proper activity is, in ceaseless strife, to contemplate the divine object, whereby we shall bear even the most terrible of life’s challenges.


Sensible beauty alters and fades; but there is an intelligible beauty which cannot perish. Love inspires us with love to pursue it. The desire of the soul is infinite, and this is in itself an assurance of its own unending fulfillment. The soul that has touched its shining goal holds eternity in a moment. Man becomes a god through intellectual contact with that transcendent object and has no thought but of divine things. He shows himself insensible and unmoved by what ordinary men feel most of all; but, through love of the divine, he disdains all other enjoyments and takes no thought of life.

These are no mere words. Bruno proved that they were sincere throughout his life and in death. "It is neither natural nor expedient that the infinite should be grasped, nor can it render itself as finite, for then it would cease to be infinite; but it is expedient and natural that the infinite, being such, should be infinitely pursued."


In which mode of seeking—not by physical desire but by thought—the imperfect is not to be deemed perfect. Instead, it circles upwards through the grades of imperfection, striving for that infinite center which is neither formed nor forms.

Of Bruno, as of Spinoza, it may be said that he was God-intoxicated. He felt that the Divine Excellence had its abode in the very heart of Nature and within his own body and spirit. Indwelling in every dewdrop as in the larger universe.

1 *Eroici*, P. II, Dial. I, ix.
2 Ibid., P. I, Dial. IV, V.
3 Ibid., P. I, Dial. III, beginning.


PI, Dialogues IV, after circa 1590.

GIORDANO BRUNO

Sidney, in the dedicatory letter to The Expulsion, must by no means be taken as pied de la lettre.

The heroic soul, says Bruno, shall seek truth and find it. At that time, Pilate's question had not yet reemerged. Bruno was happily unvexed by the problem of truth. No germ is to be discovered in any of his writings of any one of the three popular solutions which philosophy has since provided—that Truth is a copy of Reality, or constitutes Reality itself, or is a mere sign for practical life. He takes Truth quite simply and uncritically. However, there is an implicit view in The Heroici Furori and all but the earliest of his philosophical writings: our truth is a progressive, ideal approximation towards that Whole Truth which is one with the inmost nature of...


Being. Hoffding justly remarks that, in this work, complexity of feeling is taken as a criterion for its development. As to the eternal striving of the Infinite, Bruno anticipates Kant and Fichte. The interest he took in physics peeps out even in this ethical rhapsody: he points to the expansive force of steam.

There are excellent remarks on poetry. Poetry is not born in rules, says Tansillo; “rules are derived from poetry; and there are as many sorts of true rules as there are of true poets.” Cicada: “But how are true poets to be recognized!” Tansillo: “By their song.”


1. See pages 163 sq. of this work.
2. Hoffding, H., *History of Modern Philosophy*, tr. Meyer, 1900, vol. I, p. 147.
3. *Eroici*, P.I, Dial. V.
4. *Vita Nuova*, Dial. I.

**CHAPTER XII  
IN PARIS AGAIN: SOME NEW WORKS**
