
(Perhaps his unsatisfactory interview with Father Alonso Spagnuolo may have interested him enough to develop intellectual contempt for the Jesuits.) Next comes a side-light on the interest he took in Natural Science. He told me much concerning the geography and cold of Tartary and Scotland, and of the temperature of Ireland. Concerning this last, he may have learned the same from consultations with some of Elizabeth.


is very wise,  
Governors and Counselors whom he had sometimes heard treat thereof.  

I think the reader will detect an ironic flavor in this and the other entries which I have italicized.

186 GIORDANO BRUNO

On Thursday, December 12th,  
“Jordanus brought me his books on Mnemonic Art; he scorns the whole doctorate, notably Cujas and Passerat, but praises Bovillus for eloquence and delivery. He says all the teachers of humane letters in Italy are nobodies and unprofitable, but they make money as private tutors to the children of nobles. Muret got 3000 scudi, out of an income of 5000 scudi in money or its value, for teaching the nephew of Cardinal Colonna. 12,000 or 30,000 would be bestowed freely on the education of children.”

Cotin must have led the conversation onto preachers again. Bruno praises some and dispraises others. Panigarola is without insight and futile Fiamma...


Has gone off in his old age.

Three years ago. "He strongly disparages Toledo and Jesuit preachers in Italy, for they commence with an overdose of gravity and say that great mysteries are contained in the text, but at the end, nothing has come out." But Tarcagnota of Gaeta is highly commended; he has written a Universal History.

Bruno talked about the recent severe measures meted out to his turbulent nobles by the New Pope, Sixtus V. He took the side of the nobles.

Bruno calls again on the 21st and tells about his early success in demonstrating artificial memory to the Pope.

On the 27th there is another visit. The diarist is told about the robbery. He cannot get the proofs of his works to order. He has three works in view.


The Arbor Philo  
S. Opus; 2  

- The entire Physics of Aristotle, drawn up under a few figures which he will teach in half an hour.  
3

- An exposition of the Art of Lully, more full than before, with its use, which its author (Lully) did not know.  
4  

1 He was tutor at Rome to Martin Colonna, nephew of Cardinal Marc Antonio Colonna.  
2 Preacher in ordinary to the Pope.  
3 Figurae Aristotelicae Physici, printed by Pierre Chevillot the following year.  
4 De Lampade Combinatoria Lulliana, Viteberga, 1587.

198 Giordano Bruno

Physics of Aristotle  

1 was printed by Pierre Chevillot.


Who dwelt under the sign of the Red Rose in 1586 and was dedicated to Pierre d'Albigny, Abbot of Belleville. He compliments the abbot on being specially well acquainted with Aristotle and knowing what he talks about while professed peripatetics do not understand their master. All possible arguments in favor of his views ought to be presented before they are censured. The work is in two parts; the first contains a synopsis of the main conceptions of the Physics under fifteen mnemonic images, such as Apollo, Minerva, etc. The second part is a summary, not invariably correct, of the teaching of the same work and of minor treatises either by Aristotle or attributed to him at that time.

We saw in the Diary how full Bruno was of Mordente, who came from a place not so far distant from his own beloved Nola. He must have rejoiced at meeting one who was, like himself, a “servant and interpreter of Nature.”


With a common interest in applied mathematics and possessing the additional attraction of being a Neapolitan: Mordente’s mathematics were of no lasting importance; he had invented a new form of compass of no great value, and would seem to have had some worthless ideas on incommensurable quantities at a time when men were feeling their way blindly towards the discovery of new calculi. Bruno got Chevillot to print two dialogues of Fabrizio Mordente of Salerno, with which was united a Dream.

In this work, Bruno, to whom moderation was little better than a vice, loads Mordente with extravagant, if generous, praise: “The geometers of the future shall raise him to the heavens and give to his house and the Salernian sky, with its limpid..."


2 Dialogus duo de F.M.S. proprius divinae inventionis ad perfectam usque praxim, 1586.
