
3 Bruno in Somnium.

In Paris again, some new works, 189.

And a more majestic horizon, greater renown than befell remarkable Egypt, laborious Persia, or subtle Arabia.

"Let us believe that the god among geometers had some wider empire of thought than is indicated by oblivion."

Bruno was always ready enough to break away from the current worship of antiquity to the admiration of modern men. It would seem that he got impressed through his intercourse with Mordente, by two facts: that no quantity, however small, is negligible in calculation and that the concept of a minimum is relative in such wise that an instrument used for taking the altitude of the stars may involve a minimum greater than the whole diameter of the Earth. He also learned from Mordente that the same kind of reasoning can be applied...


Cable to fractions as well as whole numbers, and that in physical investigations the indefinite regress must halt at a minimum—propositions which he was to develop later on. The dialogues between Mordente and Bottero turn on the physics of Aristotle and are condensed, dispersed, and dry.

In the Dream, there is an obscure revelation to Bruno of a triangular instrument for determining degrees of latitude. He would seem to have had some dim foresight of instruments that were not then invented.

"A Hundred And Twenty Theses Concerning Nature and The Universe, Directed Against The Peripatetics" was also printed at the Red Rose “at the solicitation of the Author.” It was apparently issued before the public wrangle took place in order that the audience might have an understanding. Discovered by Miss Frith in the British Museum, catalogued under Hennequin, J. Centum et viginti articuli de natura et mundo adv. peripat. per H. Lutetiæ prop. sub clipeo et moderatione B.N. infra oct. Penot. Imp. Par. ad authoris instantiam.


86.  
— Cfr. Frith, *Life of G. B.*, 1887, pp. 324–325.

**GIORDANO BRUNO**

This summary of arguments consists of only twenty pages. It begins with a dedicatory address to Henry III, followed by an epistle to Filippo del Fiore, the Rector of the University, where Bruno expresses his gratitude for the hospitality and kindness he received at the University. He informs Filippo del Fiore that he is about to leave Paris. Subsequently, it contains theses attacking Aristotelian Physics and Cosmogony.

Coti's diary provides much-needed information concerning the debate. He heard a somewhat colored account of Bruno’s arguments.


John Vincent’s misadventure at Geneva, dated March 20th, is carefully recorded. The next reference to Bruno occurs on May 28th and 29th, which were the Wednesday and Thursday of Pentecost. Jordanus invited Royal Lecturers and everyone to hear him inveigh against seven errors of Aristotle at Cambrai. At the end of his lesson or oration, he bade defiance, urging anyone who wished to defend Aristotle or attack Bruno to come forward. As no one did so, he shouted louder, claiming victory.

Then, a young advocate named Rodolphus Celerius rose and delivered a lengthy speech defending Aristotle against Bruno’s aspersions. He began by saying that the professors were silent because they did not deem Bruno worthy of a reply. Finally, he called on Bruno to respond and defend himself. Bruno remained silent and left.

The students caught hold of Bruno, insisting they would not let him go unless he replied or withdrew the calumnies cast on Aristotle.


Nevertheless, ultimately, he escaped from their hands; I know not if on condition that he should return the next day to reply to the advocate. The advocate, having summoned an assembly for the next day by placards, got into the pulpit and followed up the defense of Aristotle and the jugglings of Bruno in fine style, still calling on him to answer.

But 192 GIORDANO BRUNO's friends had not been idle, either among professors or students. Liberty to philosophize freely was insecure at Paris, and the eighth war of religion was at hand. Indeed, Bruno was on the point of leaving Paris because of disorders when the disputation took place.

We may suppose that there was tension in the air when, according to custom, the pupil, John Hennequin, took the big chair to read Bruno's theses while their author, as moderator,


He took a lower seat. Henri must have been a lad of courage to take up a cudgel for his master's sake and for truth against every astronomer and mathematician of his age. He belonged to a great family, nicknamed "the big-pots."

The glib young Gascon, Raoul Caille, who started the fray, might have been just the kind of impertinent youth to make a successful advocate had he not abandoned the law for the better prospects of courtly office. He was related to Rapin, the poet-scholar.

Man is a combative animal, and the students of Paris were as keenly interested in an intellectual fencing-bout as the ancients were in the palaestra, our Georgians in a cockfight, or the youth of our own day in the athletic field. We can imagine the crowded hall; the seniors sardonically restless, only half-attending to the new doctrine.


The youths are full of the ebullient prejudice that always accompanies ignorance and are ready to demonstrate its force with noise. The behavior of the professors, so different from their former entreatment of Bruno, disgusts him, and it would have been below his dignity, as a former professor, to reply to Callier. The students have an opportunity to begin a rag and carry it out to their entire satisfaction. After the manner sanctioned by its antiquity, they were wont to express their contempt for any novelty by turning up their noses, gibing, blowing out their cheeks, and banging on the desks.

I N PARI S AGAIN. SOME NEW WORKS 193  
Bibliothèque Nationale MS fr. dosier Henneguín, fol. 117.


1. But on this occasion, they surpassed themselves. For Aristotle’s science had been attacked; therefore, they were insulted as Christians. “I have not taught in direct opposition to the Catholic Religion,” Bruno told the Inquisitors, but I was judged to do so indirectly at Paris, where I was permitted to engage in a disputation under the title of 120 articles against the Peripatetics and other popular philosophers, printed by permission of the Heads.

2. Latitudinarian England had proved itself indifferent to the new science; Calvinistic Geneva had persecuted its apostle, and now Catholic France definitely rejected his theses before considering them, not without a show of physical violence. He had resolved to leave disturbed France and try his fortunes elsewhere before that unhappy end to the disputation.

