3. Shall he seek some generous asylum in Germany, Catholic or Protestant?


The intrepidity of the traveler in the sixteenth century was indeed admirable. He hardly noticed discomfort and despised danger. Everywhere he had to run the risk of plague, ague, smallpox, treacherous landlords, and wayside murder. In Germany, he was usually called upon to share his bed with dirty, disagreeable wanderers; all classes sat together at the common table, and filthy fingers fished in the common bowl for the choicest pieces. Vermin were a matter of course. Yet there was no lack of company. Courtiers and scholars, monks and merchants, serving-men, and mendicants trooped all over Western Europe and jostled each other.

1 De Lampade Comb., Dedicatio.
2 Doc. XI.
3 Centum et viginti articuli Ep. ad Filesac repeated in Acrotismus,
1587.
4 Gratarolus, G. De regimine iter agentium, 1561, p. 19. — Florio.


**Giordano Bruno**

In every considerable town, people influenced each other significantly. It was an heroic age. Bruno was far too zealous a missionary to be squeamish; German bandits could hardly prove worse than British boors. Even in Erasmus' time, many people spent their lives in perpetual pilgrimage, not out of piety, but from love of change. *De utilitate colloquiorum, ad lectorem.*

Bruno's interest lay in the university, founded 59 years before (1501).


2 7)  
by Philip the Landgrave.

Here surely he would be welcomed; for not only was it the first German university established by a prince, independently of papal privileges, but at this time it was under the protection and patronage of William the Wise, Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel. German universities usually reflected the fanaticism, moderation, or policy of the reigning prince.

William was a man of independent mind and interested in astronomy. Much might be hoped for. How much of that hope was fulfilled remains recorded in the rolls of Marburg students.

Petrus Nigidius, Rector of the University, wrote therein: Jordanus Nolanus Neapolitanus, Doctor in Roman Theology, 25 July, year 86. The right of teaching philosophy in public having, for weighty reasons, been refused to him by me with the consent of the rest of the Philosophic Faculty, he blazed forth and insulted me in my house, as though I had acted in this matter contrary to the law of nations, the usages of German Universities, and...


Every exercise of the humanities. And on that account, he refused to remain a member of the University. His desire was readily granted and his name erased from the university roll.

In a letter to the University of Wittenberg, Bruno complains of having been restrained from lecturing publicly—a right recognized and used by all nations. Marburg was too fiercely Protestant to listen to one who inscribed himself as a doctor in Roman theology. It had been the scene of the famous "Colloquy" or contest between Luther, Zwingli, Melanchthon, and other theological experts concerning transubstantiation.

1 Kolbe; Marburg in Mittelalter, MMb, 1879.


2 G. B. Ora t. Val e d i c. § X.

3 Vite Berti, op. cit., cap. XI. Here the document is reproduced.

4 De Lamp. Cambi u.

5 Kolbe op. cit.

AT WITTENBERG 197

At some later time, through which Nigidius ran his pen, the name was restored, and the words "with the consent of the rest of the Philosophical Faculty" were crossed out. Probably the unfortunate wanderer was induced to try for better fortune at Wittenberg by the fact that a Neapolitan whom he had known in England—no other than Alberico Gentile, the jurist—was now lecturing there. He gave me his support, says Bruno, and introduced me to lecture on the Organon of Aristotle.


---

1 Bruno had arrived at a seat of learning which, at this time, gave more liberty to philosophical discussion than any other. Students from all parts of Europe, including many Catholics, especially young Austrian noblemen and Poles, were found studying there.

2 The professors received him cordially, and he was allowed to take private pupils on account of his poverty. Such a welcome, following the one he got at Marburg, filled him with gratitude, which, after he had resided about a year in the city, he expressed with dignity, yet not without an undertone of pathos.

3 In 1587, he printed an enlarged and improved edition of his "Compendious Architecture," issued to the world five years before. This is entitled "The Lullian Combination-Lamp" and is dedicated to the senate of the University. You have received and maintained me,

---


