He writes,

“You have dealt kindly with me up to this day. I was a stranger to you, a fugitive from the tumults in France, undistinguished by any royal recommendation, bearing no ensigns of honor, unproven and unquestioned as to your faith. Finding in me no hostility (for my desire is to follow the peaceful path of goodwill to all men), my sole claim was the profession of philosophy and pupilhood in the temple of the Muses. You took me heartily as a guest and deigned to inscribe my name worthy to be written in the book of your university, and myself to be numbered with the loftiest among its scholars.”

Stay with us; go not to Wittenberg.

“What makes you flee from Wittenberg, Horatio?”

Hamlet, Act I, Scene II.  

De Lampade Combinatoria, Dedication. 198

GIORDANO BRUNO


Most learned among you. Wherefore I must acknowledge this great University, this German Athens, as no mere private school or ordinary guild of scholars, and as my very own.

He names professor after professor, among them Grim, who held that theology cannot stand apart from metaphysics, with accompanying remarks of respect and even admiration.

The University, which later on was incorporated with Halle, was founded in 1502 and had been the abode of Luther, who spent half his days there and who, like Bruno now, lectured on the "Organon" as well as on Dialectic, and later, on theology. Bruno never before breathed such a free atmosphere as Wittenberg generally enjoyed since Luther's days up to when he first came there.


There was no small measure of such religious toleration and philosophical liberty as the sixteenth century understood. For a brief space, “sang Pindar,” hath Opportunity for men, but of him it is known surely when it cometh and he waiteth thereon, a servant but no slave.

In his official capacity, the new professor would seem to have lectured on Rhetoric among other subjects; for what is supposed to be the notes of his teaching—a summary of the Ad Alexandrum, falsely ascribed to Aristotle, together with outlines of arguments and synonyms to be used by speakers—was printed by John Henry Alsted, who acquired them. The first part of the work is nothing but a digest; the second part, "The Art Of Making A Speech."


Giordano Bruno's work can be seen as a kind of memory technique with arguments and synonyms ready for use. In the same year appeared a much more important work entitled "B. Nela n i Camoera censu s Acroti smus seu rationes articulorum physicorum adversus Aristotelicos." It is not possible to render into English the full implications of this title. Aristotle’s treatise on cosmology is headed 'Metaphysics,' and the 'Acrotismus' is an attack on his cosmology. However, 'Acrotismus' conveys a double, perhaps even a triple meaning.


Signification: It shows that Bruno possessed far more than the little Greek indicated in “As on Wednesday Supper.” 

Acrotismus and acroamatic are also words used by Aristotle; the first means an extremity, a height, or summit; the second, one who comes to hear a discourse.

In fact, the Acrotismus is a reprint of the “One Hundred and Twenty Articles,” with the addition of the defense intended to have been made at the College of Cambrai. "Camoeracensis" is a doubly barbarous Latinization, the interpretation of which has been given already.

The title of the work might be freely translated as “The Cosmology of Giordano Bruno the Nolan, or the arguments of articles on physics against the Peripatetics.”


The work opens with a letter to the Parisians and other philosophers of the most generous Kingdom of France, as well as to friends and defenders of the philosophy of direct perception. Probably Bruno had not learned that Henry announced on January 15th that he did not intend to observe the Edict of Beaulieu, which granted the toleration of Protestants. However, he would know that the French King was in:

1. Aristot., Plant., II, IX, 12 Pol., II, XII, 9.

See page 61, n. 3.

We read "e regione gymnasi Cameracen sis" and "prope collegium Cameracense" in De Umbria and De compendiosa Architectura, respectively, both works being printed by Gorbin.


AT WITTENBERG 1521

Universal odium. Yet his gratitude to the Valois was so great that the next item in the book is a reprint of his letter to Henry which had been prefixed to the "Hundred And Twenty Articles," with the only change being the substitution of "most powerful King" for "greatest among Kings." The epistle to Francis follows, with "The Awakener."

Then come the important theses. The defense of these is very soberly put: there must be unalterable, universal meanings in Nature; 1) the matter of Aristotle is a mere logical abstraction; 2) body limits space and not space body; space is room for movement and must be infinite; 3) he agrees


With Aristotle, it is believed that space is filled. Movement in space is the measure of time, not time the measure of motion. We know duration through change. Division to infinity cannot be accepted because a mathematical line is not infinite; it may only be indefinitely produced and has no sum. We must stop at minimal bodies in physics, although they are too small to be apparent to sense.

There must be an internal change in the inert to cause movement, and the First Mover is within, not outside, the entire universe, which is forever moving, vegetating, and living. Tocco believes he came closer to a clear conception of the laws that govern motion than any man of his time.

Bruno speaks of ether as ungenerated, incorruptible, and immeasurable.
