The latter being free from matter and wholly intelligible. Evil is necessary, being the complement of good; without it, good could not exist.

3 The perfection of the Whole depends on the perfection of its parts in relation to itself, and it is greater than they are.

7  
It is noteworthy that he accepts the divine mission of Christ, the Son of God, sent "to raise us up from brutality and barbarism to the practice of love." He often writes in a way to which no orthodox Roman Catholic could possibly take exception; however, it is clear that he sincerely believed the Church needed purgation from superstitions and that its doctrines may legitimately receive metaphysical interpretation from the wise. Here, as whenever he treats of religion as more than a means of preserving social order and stability, he would substitute the milk of reverence and the bread of philosophy for the fiery distillations of dogma, whether Catholic or Protestant. He accepts much that is miraculous.


For all is a miracle, and superstitious people are impressed chiefly by that which is not yet understood. But the essence of Christianity lies in love or in nothing, and this has been forgotten.

The work closes with the quaint observation: Thanks.

1 Cfr. Causa, Dial. I Spaccio, Epist. Expli.
2 Op. lat., iii, p. 182. Cfr. pp. 46, 47, 50.
3 Ibid., p. 59.
4 Ibid., p. 48.
5 Ibid., p. 160.
6 Ibid., pp. 21, 23.
7 Ibid., p. 108.


---

3  
I bid., p. 15. 8. Cfr. Docs. xi, xiii, xii.

AT WITTENBERG 1557: "To God, we have finished the Art of Discovery by Means of Thirty Statues."

This period also includes a dictated manuscript preserved at Erlangen dated March 13th, 1587. It is entitled “Observations Concerning The Lullian Lamp,” and it is a tractate on the method of "getting at genera and species by definition, at predicates by judgments, and at middle terms by demonstration," not without mnemonic dodges.


Albums were as fashionable among reverential scholars in the sixteenth century as they were among young ladies in the Victorian era. One, which belonged to a certain Hans von Warnsdorf, is preserved in the Public Library at Stuttgart and contains a characteristic entry in Bruno’s firm, bold hand. It reads:

“Solomon and Pythagoras: What it is that anything in reality is, That which it was. What was it! That which it is. There is nothing new under the sun. Jordanus Brunus Nolanus, Wittenberg, 18 Sept., 2.

Before reaching Germany, where he intended his work not to be taken too assertively, the Nolan had written about that drunken land; where their shields are plates and their helmets pipkins and kettles.


Their swords,  
the thigh-bones of salt beef;  
their trumpets, drinking glasses,  
pitchers and flagons their drums, barrels and tuns;  
their field, a table to drink (I would say, eat) at;  
where their fortresses, bulwarks and bastions are cellars, ale-houses  
and brandy-shops, which are more numerous than their houses.  
Where Gluttony is exalted, magnified, celebrated. An inversion of Ci rca Lampadem Lulli anam. Stated, vol. ii i. Sigwart gives a reproduction of the handwriting, Kl ei n e S chriften, vol. i, Freiburg, 1889, p. 293. Spacci o.


I,  
and glorified among the heroic virtues,  
and drunkenness is numbered among the divine attributes,  
and so on, interminably. He now enjoyed, for the first time,  
the hospitality of a German University which, in spite of its beer and groaning tables, was really alive, and he might exercise true philosophic liberty there. Like Pius II, he revised his judgment, recognized the merit of existing German achievement, and declared that when Germans should cease to waste their energies on theological futilities, directing themselves to saner thinking.


They would become, not men, but gods. Indeed, extraordinary latitude was extended to Bruno, for, as he says, he proclaimed certain doctrines that uprooted the received teaching of centuries and did not adhere strictly to science as accepted by theology.

A storm was gathering, although the University still continued an unusual toleration of opinions opposed to those considered "right."

In 1580, the Lutherans of Germany issued the famous Formula of Concord, popularly known as that of Discord. There was a subtle undercurrent of Calvinistic opposition, and Philippists maintained the broader-minded principles of Philip Melanchthon with customary intolerance for any other views.
