
The Elector Augustus of Saxony died in February of the year of Bruno's arrival and was succeeded by his son, Christian I, a prince who succumbed after a short time, like so many German rulers of his time.


To drink: Christian’s brother-in-law, John Casimir, regent of the Palatinate, was busy coercing his own wife and people into Calvinism. This naturally aroused the indignation of Saxon Lutherans.

It is difficult to get at:  
1. Spaccio, III, ii  
2. Oratio Valedictoria  
3. Eu. Silv.; op. omn., Basel, 1571, Ep. ad Gug. de Stein; Ep. ad Greg. Heimburg.  
4. Bezelod, F. v.; Brieffe d. Pfalzgr. Casimir, Munich, 1882.

GIORDANO BRUNO  
He exalted such Germans as Albertus Magnus, Paracelsus, and Landgrave William of Hesse, patron.


Of Copernicus. Of Cusanus, he said that he would have equalled Pythagoras had not his genius been stifled under priestly garments. In the city of Luther, some eulogy of the great Reformer was expected. While the dogmas of the warring sects repelled Bruno, he admired Luther for protesting against ecclesiastical tyranny and rejecting fetters for the soul forged at priestly smithies.

"But whom," said he, "have we passed by! The mighty hero who resisted the voracious monster, half-fox, half-lion, that vicar of the princes of Hell who polluted the world by craft and force and cajoled men into superstitious and uncouth worship under the disguise of divine knowledge and the simplicity which is acceptable to God. Whence comes he? From Germany, from the banks of the Elbe. Out of the darkness of Orcus your Hercules dragged forth the monster with the triple crown, bursting open the steely gates of Hell, triumphing over the city guarded by triple walls and the nine-fold stream of Styx. Thou hast seen the light, O Luther; thou hast regarded it."


Thou hast heard the awakening spirit of the Lord and hast obeyed it; thou hast confronted and overcome the adversary girt about with power, and thou hast despoiled him. What he now said, added to what appeared later in a Latin poem, was probably the chief cause of the curious impression that by the "beast" of Spaccio Bruno referred to the Pope. Also, a tradition seems to have arisen from this oration that he had written a panegyric upon:

1. Oration Valedictoria, Vitheberga e habitata, 1588, apud Zach Cratonem.
2. Ibi d.
3. De Immenso, VI, VII, i, v. 67 sqq.
4. Circa Brunhofer op. cit.


---

p. 245

— Cfr. Conrad Ritterhusio suo  
G. Schoppius, F.R.S., given by Berti, Frith and others.

AT WITTENBERG 209

**Devil.**

1. It is probable that the farewell declamation affected his treatment at the hands of the Inquisition. It would have been churlish in one who had been allowed to teach strange doctrine in the cradle of Lutheranism, without any enquiry being made into his own religious faith, if he had abstained from some recognition of Luther as a liberating force and the enemy of ecclesiastical abuse. But Bruno confined himself to no conventional homage; he knew no mean; he expressed his gratitude in passion at praise of a man with whose opinions he had less sympathy than disagreement. While he regarded Luther as right in breaking up abuses, he was far from admiring Lutheranism. He considered the reformers to be men more ignorant than himself.

2. Yet perchance it had been well for him had he merely repeated the compliments he had already paid the University.


---

With the praises of Rome's archfoe still fresh in his mouth, he set forth confidently for Prague, the capital of a Catholic monarch and the seat of a Catholic university. However, he was no Lutheran; he deemed himself a Catholic, justly asserting the right to read profound esoteric doctrines into the dogmas of his Church.

1 Cfr. Keckern; Syst. lib. I, cxvi i i, p. 1647 I. i i, opera, Edi t. Genev., 1614; quoted by Bayle, P.; Dictionary (Engli sh), 1738, p. 158 and n. 2.

2 Doc. xi i.

3 De Lamp. Comb., dedication.

CHAPTER XIV

---


