At Prague and Helmstedt: The Works of 1588—1690

The University at Prague had maintained more or less liberal traditions during its two centuries of existence. Although there was a reactionary movement, by far the greater number of people in Bohemia were Protestants of one kind or another; nor had the Jesuits yet gained control. However, the city had lost much of its privileged liberty and was just sufficiently a place of compromise to serve as a residence for Emperor Rudolf II.

Rudolf achieved the Bohemian crown in 1575 by merely pledging his kingly word to introduce a comprehensive Confession that should prove satisfactory to the entire Bohemian people—a superhuman undertaking which was never fulfilled. Although Catholics in power were gradually forcing Protestants back into the Roman Church, there was provisional peace, making Bruno's visit to Prague less dangerous than it might appear.

There was indeed more than one reason why he directed his steps thither. Rudolf might perhaps have been considered a widely...


Cultivated man had he not chanced to be born a prince. He affected every known branch of knowledge and posed as its patron. His scientific and artistic collections were magnificent. The melancholy which oppressed his later years manifested itself at this time only in strange and singular behavior. He wasted much time over horoscopes and the search for the philosopher's stone, but his interest in the perversions of science attracted Dr. Dee and Georgius Dacus. A work dedicated to the Emperor was entitled "One Hundred and Sixty Articles Directed Against The Mathematicians And Philosophers Of The Day." The dedication is lofty and bold. He tells Rudolf that he looks forward to a religion of love which shall be no cause of controversy, being the desire of the soul and required by the reasonable covenants of the nation and society. He protests against conflicting sects and intolerance of every kind. But he did not limit opprobrium to those who.


Use the words of a modern seer, who are wont to vilify the sun because it will not light their cigar. He detested still more those who "enforce their own prejudices with fire and sword." 

Bruno's ideal was the transformation of Catholic Christianity, purged of parasitic absurdities, into a true progressive religion. He had not the knowledge or interest to criticize Christianity; but he saw how "authority usually binds and deceives in countless ways and that the thinker must set himself free from subjection to any other mind."

"It is sheer prejudice to settle a matter with small consideration. It is an evil deed to follow obsequiously the lead of another man; corrupt, slavish, and traitorous to the dignity of free men to consent and surrender. It is wholly stupid to believe because of wont and usage; and imbecile to assent to the opinion of the mob."

We wish this law to...


Be vigorously observed, that reason is as true as it is necessary, and the authority of no men, however true and excellent persons they may be, is admissible as an argument. “Thus do we go forth to the most delightful splendor of light, understand Nature (which is crying aloud to be heard) and follow wisdom (which we hold supreme above all) with singleness of spirit and an honest heart.” He speaks of a new spirit which shall animate the future. Of himself he says: “In the free field of philosophy I shall shelter me from the ever-moving flood and seek the society of them that open their eyelids.”

J.B.N. Articuli centum et sexaginta adversus quibus temporis thematicos atque philosophos. Ad Divum Rudolphum II Imperatorem.

Articuli centum et sexaginta, dedicatio. AT PRAGUE AND HELMS TETT 213

He speaks of a new spirit which shall animate the future. Of himself he says: “In the free field of philosophy I shall shelter me from the ever-moving flood and seek the society of them that open their eyelids.”


He asserts with the Kantists that all measure is determined by the prior measure of the mind; and we seem to be listening to Descartes when told that “everything, however men may deem it assured and evident, proves, when it is brought under discussion, to be no less doubtful than are extravagant and absurd beliefs.”

A brief introduction follows the dedication, and then come 160 articles and 180 constructions which are but bare outlines of much which Bruno dealt with later in the *De Minimo* and *De Monade*. One object of the articles was to show that the propositions of Euclid can be intuited in three figures. Bruno's mathematics are crude and fallacious, but they have never received the attention of a capable mathematician who might, it is quite possible, detect some germs of valuable ideas amid much inaccuracy and misconception.


Construction is crucial, especially his statement that we must assume a physical unit that cannot be appreciated by the senses any more than a true sphere can. He holds that mathematical science starts from multiple units depending on the kind of mathematical consideration involved—a doctrine he tried to develop later.

The Emperor rewarded him with less than he probably expected; a treatise on alchemy or astrology would have procured him a far richer reward.

“I stayed six months in Prague and, whilst I maintained myself there, got a book on Geometry printed which I presented to the Emperor. He gave me three hundred dollars; and, possessed of these, I left Prague.”

In 1576, Helmstedt in the duchy of Brunswick suddenly found itself in a position it failed to maintain for many years. In that year, a university was opened there.


Which became one of the chief seats of learning in Germany.

Its founder, Duke Julius of that ancient house of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel, which traced descent from Azzo, Marquis of Este, was a somewhat effusive and stimulating potentate who took the fancy of his people. His policy was conservative and directed by dynastic and personal motives, although his motto declared: “I spend myself in succouring others.” A Protestant, he allowed his son and successor, Henry Julius, to become the nominally Catholic Bishop of Halberstadt at the age of fourteen; but it is to his credit that when he abolished monastic houses, he abstained from enriching himself thereby.

The articles of this new university aimed at controlling angry controversies. The establishment was adorned by fifty professors. Whether the constitution of the Academy attracted Bruno we do not know. All that he tells us is: “Providence, not Chance.”


Conducted me to this place.

He matriculated on Jan. 13th, 1589. Julius died shortly after his arrival, and Bruno was so far successful that some time after the funeral he was allowed to deliver and print a funeral oration. In it, he spoke of being an exile for truth's sake; he “had suffered from the hungry tooth of the Roman wolf, but is now in the enjoyment of complete freedom.” Bruno did not stop with the word wolf. Uncalculating, unguarded, headlong as ever, he cast aside caution.

Ludewig Geschi chte u. Beschrei bung d. Stadt Helmstedt, Helm., 1821.

Heinemann, O. v. Geschichte von Braunschweig und Hannover, Gotha, 1886 sq.

—Bodermann, E.; Herzog Julius, Zeitschr. d. hist. Ver. f. Niedersachsen, No. 932, Hannover, 1887. — Beste, J.
