3. Opus Latinum, p.455. Compare Matthew 12:38.  

---


5  
8; xvi  
i, 20.  
4 Op. Latin, p. 513 sq.  
5 Ibi d., p. 522.  
3 Doc. xi i.  
2 18 GIORDANO BRUNO  

Acceptance of physical minimal particles or atoms, a view derived from antiquity and elaborated in the great Latin poem. The whole book is an adventure into the unknown: everywhere he crosses the borderland of exact knowledge.

Pursuing a similar theme comes the Lullian Medicine, drawn partly from mathematical principles, partly from physical principles.


I  
It was dictated in Helmstedt immediately after the “Principles.” There are two codices, one being an incomplete emendation of the other. Most of the work is derived from the rare medical works of Lully.

2  
One of the conditions under which professors might teach at Helmstedt was an obligation to set forth the "true ancient philosophy without disguise, display, or innovation."  

3  
Bruno was nothing if not an innovator, especially in cosmology. The subversion of ancient geocentric theory reflected severely on the Christian scheme. So one is not surprised to find a letter which exhibits him in trouble again. It is preserved in the Archives of the University, written in Bruno’s own hand and addressed to a certain pro-rector Hofmann, who was at that time Professor of Philosophy and leader of a religious party. It runs: "Very Illustrious and Reverend Pro-rector: Jordanus Bruno,"


The Nolan, being excommunicated by the chief pastor and supervisor of the Church at Helmstedt (one Boethius), who made himself both judge and executor without allowing any public defense, humbly protests to your Magnificence and the very potent dignities of the Senate against the public execution of a personal and highly iniquitous decree. He demands to be heard so that he may know if:

1. De Medicina Lulliana, partim ex mathematicis, partim ex physicis principiis educata.
2. Lutoslawski, V; Archiv f. Gesch. d. Ph., I, p. 566.
3. Bartholomew, cited work, I, p. 170, n. 2.

Chapter XV: AT FRANKFURT AND ZURICH

The Free City of Frankfurt-on-the-Main was one of the most important places in Germany. The Golden Bull of 1356 constituted it as the seat of Imperial Election. It was a renowned center of trade, and twice a year, at Eastertide and Michaelmas, merchants from every country were to be found at its famous fair. It stood first in the bookselling and printing trade of Germany. A member of the Protestant...


Party, its city fathers found it commercially advantageous to tolerate Roman Catholics and all factions of the revolt against Rome, even the Socinian faction. An evil reputation indeed must have preceded Bruno, for we find it recorded in the Book of the Burgomaster, July 2nd, that when he begged permission to dwell in the house of Wechel, the printer, it was resolved that his petition be refused and that he be told to take his penny elsewhere.

Printers were erudite men in those days, and scholars and statesmen foregathered at their shops, which were true intellectual centers where the latest books were seen and discussed. News and ideas came in from abroad, and dilettante courtiers could meet and gossip. The printers were in the habit not only of lodging traveling scholars while they were printing their books but also of taking traveling nobles as boarders; for the great scholars usually preferred seclusion to the honor and profit of receiving guests who were likely to disturb their studies and households.

No. 160, p. 48.


**202  
AT FRANKFURT AND ZURICH 221**

They should be well-paid for the service. Sidney had been the guest of the Wechels, and it is possible that Bruno was enabled to get a footing with them by reason of the two books he had dedicated to one whose chivalrous behavior on the field of Warnsfeld, followed by his death, not only made him the idol of his countrymen but added additional glory to a name which was already famous throughout Europe. John Wechel contrived, in spite of the prohibition, to get Bruno received at the Carmelite monastery and provided him with means of support.


Obiis' Brother Brictanus,  
a middle-aged man born in Antwerp but who had settled as a bookseller in Venice,  
told the Inquisitors that he had met and talked with Bruno at Frankfurt and other places. Bruno had never spoken to him about Christianity or Catholicism, but the Prior of this Carmelite monastery told him that "he was chiefly occupied in writing and in vain and chimerical imagining of novelties. Heretic doctors read with him; for in that city they are mostly heretical." The innovator and "awakener" could not fail to produce misgivings and discomfort among the good fathers, and one is not surprised to learn that when Brictanus asked the Prior what manner of man Bruno might be, he was told that he was a man of fine intellect and erudition—a universal man—but he…


"(The Prior) did not believe him to possess a trace of religion; adding that he professed to know more than the Apostles and could, if he wished, make the whole world of one religion." When asked who his intimate friends were, Bruno could not mention any. Thus, it seems Bruno would have experienced that mental isolation which is often the lot of original or merely independent thinkers.

References:
