1. Erpenii Thomae, De Peregrinatione Gallica, 1631, pp. 6, 12.
2. Bourn e, H. R . Fox, op. cit., p. 91.
3. The Italians called him Giacomo Bertano (Doc.). How they spelled his name in his native Flanders, I do not know.

4. Doc. vi.  
222 GIORDANO BRUNO

Even of the merely independent thinker! Giambattista


Ciotta, a young Sienese of 27, who ran a bookshop in the Merceria, the chief street of Venice, under the sign of Minerva, saw a good deal of Bruno during the fairs. However, even though Bruno later frequented his shop in Venice, Ciotta never heard anything that could arouse suspicion as to Bruno's religious beliefs.

At the Fairs, Bruno encountered all sorts and conditions of men and engaged intellectually with much of what was most vigorous in European thought and life. The first work of Bruno’s printed by Wechel and Fischer, "De Triplici Minimo et Mensura," was dedicated to Duke Henry Julius of Brunswick. The dedication was not written by the author but by the printers. It is dated February 13th, 1591, and states that Bruno was "forced by an unexpected event to leave the city when only the last leaf remained for him to finish, and, being unable to correct this as he had done to the rest of the work, he wrote, asking us to complete in his name the labor forbidden to him by fate.

"We are in darkness as to what had happened. It may have been that the City Fathers were about to follow up their resolution with ejection; or it may have been that an invitation from the lord of Elgg necessitated a hurried (and, perhaps, prudent) departure. John Henry Hainzel, of a literate Augsburg family, had just acquired the estate of Elgg near Zurich. Hainzel studied alchemy, was greatly inclined to the uncanny and mysterious, and exercised noble hospitality towards thinkers, especially those who claimed acquaintance with the borderland of exact knowledge.

1 Doc. v.
2 This is Sigwart’s suggestion; cf. Kleine Schriften I.
3 Sigwart, C. von; Kleine Schriften, 1889, I, p.123. Hainzel's


Passion for alchemy and alchemists proved his ruin.

In 1624, Giordano Bruno might have prejudiced his case with the judges. 

"Some times Prudence hides the truth with her skirts in order to escape blame and outrage."

There is no record of permission having been given for the publication of *De Monade*, with its far more important and larger adjunct, *De Immenso*, or of *De Compositione*, but both volumes bear the date 1591. We learn from Bassecu's Catalogue of Frankfurt books that they were ready for the Michaelmas Fair. The first of these volumes was dedicated, like the *De Triplici Minimo*, “to the very”


Illustrious and Reverend Prince Henry Julius, Duke of Brunswick and Lüneburg, Bishop of Halberstadt, were printed by the partners John Wechel and Peter Fischer.

In the Golden Book of Venice, wherein the families of the oligarchy were inscribed, stood the noble house of Mocenigo. So distinguished was it that it gave three doges to the State in the 15th century and one in the 16th.

One day, deposed Giambattista Ciotto, the bookseller, Signor Giovanni Mocenigo, a patrician of Venice, when he was buying a recent work of Giordano's, asked me if I knew him and if I knew where he was staying. I told him that I had seen him at Frankfurt and believed he was still there; whereupon the said Sig. Mocenigo added...


I should like him to come to Venice to teach me the secrets of memory and the other things which he professes, as one may see in this book. To this I answered, "It is believable that, if besought, he will come." Some days afterwards, Sig. Mocenigo brought me a letter addressed to the said Cfr. G.B., Op. Lat. (State edition), vol. III, xxI-xxII. 

Spaccio, II, 121.

From the MS, it would seem that Ciotti first said the work was "Eroici Furori"—this name is erased and De Minimo, Magno et Mensum (sic) substituted for it. Evidently, Ciotti had no clear


Memory of what work it was.

AT FRANKFURT AND ZURICH 225

Giordano beseeched me to deliver [it], saying that he wrote to ask him if he would come to Venice.

Bruno’s account runs:

“Being in Frankfurt last year, I received two letters from Signor Giovanni Mocenigo, inviting me to Venice to teach him the art of memory and discovery, with promises to treat me well, and that I should be satisfied with him.”

Now Bruno had not always misjudged concerning what might befall him. In England, he wrote of a procession of 50 or 100 torches in broad daylight that would not be lacking in a Roman Catholic country.

But he had dwelt in Roman Catholic countries and been less subject to the molestation and oppression which he experienced at Geneva, Marburg, and Helmstedt. Venice, like Frankfurt, was a center of trade, and the love of lucre so prevailed.


Over the love of God, heretics found a fairly safe asylum there. It was a city renowned for its intellectual and artistic force, as well as the beautiful productions of its printers, to whom much liberty was allowed. Many books published in Venice were condemned by Rome; however, this was largely due to efforts by a rival press seeking monopoly.
