
Venice alone among Italian states had preserved her independence from foreign Catholic powers. She alone had resolutely and, in the main, successfully resisted the encroachments of the Papacy on civil liberty. Lutheranism was at the time a fashionable craze among the rich young dilettanti of Venice, providing prospects for lucrative occupation.

Bruno received a renewed invitation from a member of a renowned and powerful house, offering him protection. He may have known that Giovanni Mocenigo, a man now entering middle life (he was 34), had been one of the Assessors.


2 Doc. vi.

3 Cena, Dialogi V. Sigwart, op. cit., p. 302.

5 Doc. ii.

Giordano Bruno

of the State to the Inquisition;

If so, surely an invitation from such a source ensured safety. Bruno never regarded himself as other than a Roman Catholic. So secure did he feel that even when he found himself trapped, he felt no serious misgivings.

“I shall tell the truth,” he said to the Inquisitors. “Often I have been threatened with being brought before the Holy Office and ever did I deem it a joke; wherefore I am ready to give an account of myself.”

He entertained the extraordinary delusion that he could induce the Church to receive him again and allow him to dwell unmolested and outside his order in his own beloved.


Province.

1. Not all his bitter experience had taught him the invincible, terrific power which is achieved over the minds and actions of most men by doctrines early instilled and fortified by habit, tradition, general consent, and authoritative pressure; how feeble is mere intellect to overthrow passionate bigotry or push aside passionate ignorance or calm the resentment of menaced power.

He had written of himself as a citizen and servant of the world. A child of the sun and mother earth he was, he said, no mere stranger out of place in foreign lands, but as a member of the Divine Universe, he could share its life in any place. He said this with his head; his heart throbbed for home. Venice might prove a stepping stone towards his never-forgotten and dearly loved Campagna.

Once in Venice, might he not, by discreet conduct and working through men of influence, return to his native soil? In a fatal moment, he resolved to trust to the honor of a Venetian patrician and to the historic independence…


At the end of the Venetian State era:

1. Does. i x, x.

2. Spaccio, Epist. Espli e

228 GIORDANO BRUNO

The first books contain a restatement of the teachings of the Causa, somewhat improved and more detailed. The remaining three are chiefly mathematical. The main argument is concerned with the threefold unity of three speculative sciences: God, who is "both the greatest and the least that may be," of the unitary individual soul, and of the material atom or physical unit.

As successive works by Bruno appear, one finds a gradual disappearance of mere Neo-Platonism and the theory of emanation. There is less mere admiration of the transcendence of God and deeper contemplation of His immanence in Nature.

These Latin poems are chiefly concerned with the operations of a Living Universe. Five years before Descartes was born, we find declared here that...


“ Whoever teaches Philosophy must set to work by putting all things in doubt.”

The thinker seeks the Universal; he desires knowledge of some underlying principle or supporting substance beneath the flux of things. Such a substance must be simple—that is, without parts—because if it had parts, these would require a single, simple principle or substrate. Thought necessitates the unchanging amid change, ever at one with itself. Differences in number, oppositions between good and evil, all contraries—in a word, must be unified, as Cusanus taught. The greatest must be at one with the least; the maximum must coincide with the minimum. So it is with God. He is “a unit, the source of all numbers, wholly simple, the substance of magnitude and composition, a dignity above every phase, not to be computed, infinitely.”


Great.

"He is the unit of units."  
"But we must not."

1. Tocco, F, *Opuscula Latina di G. B.* exposed etc., edited by Fitzgerald, 1889, p. 138.
2. Tocco, F; *Conferenza*, edited by Fitzgerald, 1886.
3. *De Minimo* I, i.
