
1b id. I, i, schol.
5. "Deus est monadum monas," ibid., I iv.

THE GREAT LATIN POEM AND LAST BOOKS 229


Regard the Absolute One as bare unity. In a work written just before this one was published, our author writes: In themselves, things change, and, in the material world, are effects and imperfect. They are rather non-beings than beings, for they issue from the void and, so far from truly being, they depart into the void. Their true existence must be where they cannot but be, in that first cause and perfect principle wherein lies the will and the power for their production at pleasure. Wherefore, their true being is in the Monad itself, where consequently, they are truly known—in simplicity and concurrence; for there all things are one without distinction or dispersion or number, but this in an ineffable way.

Bruno regards the unit from metaphysical, physical, and critical points of view. Metaphysically considered,


The soul is an eternal minimum, a possibility for change. He resolved to treat fully of metaphysics and the soul "if it should please God to bestow upon him time." To our loss, it was not permitted. There are minima of spirit, which are not further reducible and wherein absolute spirit manifests itself. The relation of these minima to absolute spirit is not shown, nor could it be, since at least one term of the relation remains quite ineffable. Bruno would seem in another work to incline to the opinion that they cannot be regarded as mere parts or divisions of one spirit; truly, it remains in doubt.

No less than minima of spirit, souls or centers of experience must we posit minima in the physical world. Bruno definitely adopts an atomic theory. The material (cfr. Bradley, F.H.; op. cit., chapters xii).


---

2. Lasswitz G. B., and Die Atomistik, Vierteljahrschrift für Wissenschaft. Philosophie, 1884. — Mc Lin t yre Op cit., p. 246 sqq.

3. Lampas triginta statuam m, op. lat., cum Tocco and Vitelli, p. 58.

230 GIORDANO BRUNO

The universe, he says, is composed of irreducible units or atoms, which enter into composition as do the letters of the alphabet into the formation of words. It must be so since there cannot be infinite divisibility; for could we go on subdividing forever, there would be no substance: there must be some minimum which has no parts. And if it were not so, every


The thing would be penetrable; there would be no resistance of body to body. Composition changes, but the absolute minimum or substance is immortal: it is the possibility of change. Physical differences depend on this possibility being realized in the composition of these simple, homogeneous atoms. Each minimum is the center of an energy which is an external quality and is endlessly extended. It is indestructible, endlessly in motion, and derives its activity from the operation of final causes issued from the individual soul or from the Soul of the World. Each minimum or least thing is also the possibility of its own maximum, drawing all other minima it may into connection with itself.

2. And most of all must this be said of the Unit of Units, wherein the maximum and minimum and all qualities coincide and are at one.

3. Bruno’s Absolute is self-conscious Spirit, containing and knowing all that is within itself.

4. An atom is spherical.


5 Atoms come into contact at points on their surfaces, leaving curved triangular spaces between them.

6 Since they touch with a limited surface only, we must be careful to distinguish between body and limit, and not to confuse these as Aristotle does.

7 In other words, we must not confound mathematical intuitions with physical reality. 

References:
1. *De Minimo*, I, 26.
2. *Ibid.*, I, ii, 22–29, 50–55.
3. *Ibid.*, I, iv.


v. 1.0 sqq.

Carrière, Weltanschauung der Reformation, p. 470.

5 De minimo,

I, xi; xiv I; I, ii;

Ibid.,

I, xi.
