
7 Ibid.,

I, vii, v. 19—254; o-43.

23

GIORDANO BRUNO: the physical atom is immortal.


From this and one or two similar remarks elsewhere, some writers have supposed that Bruno came at last to reject the teachings of the Causa (presumably referring to a particular philosophical school) and to believe in personal immortality. Here, he speaks of the transformations of the soul as not occurring haphazardly but depending on the kind of life which has been led. Taken as a piece de la lettre, this is an explicit assertion of personal immortality. However, one often has to read the real Bruno between the written lines and, above all, to compare every one of his utterances on a subject before forming a conclusive judgment about his true meaning.

He repeats in this work that there is one Soul of the World, manifesting itself in manifold forms, and the passage may merely be his way of expressing the "secret sympathies" of nature, which produce such facts as heredity, the transmission of ideas through space and time, definite tendencies in matter and mind, etc. Professor McIntyre thinks Bruno came to accept personal immortality.


---

2 Tocco, the completest and minutest of Brunian scholars, once thought so too. However, since he had access to the manuscript works which have now been published, partly under his care, he has completely changed his opinion. He maintains that in Bruno’s philosophy, while matter is resolved into insensible, irreducible atoms, spirit is not thus fractionized but remains always one with itself in quality and substance.

3 It may be questioned whether Bruno ever regarded the atomic theory as other than a relative one for human knowledge. But Tocco charges him with inconsistency and dualism in applying one principle to brute matter.

4 De minimo, I, iv,

---


10 sqq.  
2 Mc I nty re; op. cit., pp. 307, 313 sqq.  
3 Tocco, F.; Conferenza, Firenze, 1886.  
4 Tocco, F.; Opus ineditum di G. B. Napoli, 1891. Cf. the last few pages of his study on the Lamps as tria ginta statu arum and the Introduction, p. 7.

**THE GREAT LATIN POEM AND LAST BOOKS**

In *The Lamps*, written at Wittenberg and elsewhere, Bruno writes that neither body nor soul need fear death since both are eternal and constant principles. However, reducing the Universe to two distinct principles—matter and spirit—anticipates Descartes to some degree but is not made fully explicit.


There remains the all-inclusive, comprehensive Unity, which is at once Divine Intuition and Divine Power, encompassing all things else. No category is ultimately definitive for the Nolan. If he divides matter and spirit, he does not finally divorce them. A bold thinker today would need to be assured of the certainties of science and their own metaphysical power to interpret electrons in terms of spirit or vice versa. Bruno’s atoms seem to be virtually active spirits under the direction of individual souls. Thus, animal centers of experience direct the atomic evolution of the body from the heart as a center.

Regarding Bruno's often obscure assertions concerning immortality, we must remember that it was his habit, and indeed necessary even for an unguarded person, to speak in guarded language. He employs current conceptions to rise above them; he makes use of any aspect of Pythagorean or any other philosophy which approximates towards his own and can provide understanding.


This view finds some measure of authoritative support; he enjoys suggestive mythology and entices learners with "language of accommodation," for there is some trace of truth in all things, more or less discernible. The reflective student can usually penetrate through the mask, which serves as both an incitement and a clue. There are considerable difficulties in interpretation here.

We have seen that, in the Wittenberg "Lamp" (De Minimo, I, i, s chol; ii, v. 22-29, 50—55 Causa, Dialogus II), he wrote about how some think particular beings to be specific manifestations of the Soul of the World. Others believe that the Soul of the World is divided into parts. While it remains in doubt, we tend to favor the first opinion.

GIORDANO BRUNO (1538–1600) was an influential philosopher who proposed ideas that challenged traditional views on cosmology and metaphysics.


1 A little further on, he writes that multiplication falls on the side of brute matter, while the soul remains one.

2 Of an underlying identification of the individual center of experience with Universal Experience, Bruno felt sure. This implies a higher, fuller immortality than mere personal continuance with memory synthesis or mere continued being-in-flux without memory. Yet neither of these is inconsistent with Bruno's central conception. Probably he formed no definite conclusion about matters which he would regard as of minor importance and unsupported by conclusive evidence. Tocco writes:

“ The individualization of the soul is for Bruno a fleeting event which in the infinite bosom of time has but the stability and duration of a flash.”

3 But assuredly, Bruno meant much more than this. As has been shown, he identifies the human spirit with the Absolute Spirit in the last resort. Of the Absolute Spirit, he writes in a work of approximately the same date that “past is not...”


Present it as past or future, but the whole of time is present to it wholly, at once and complete. “To die,” he says elsewhere, "is to spring into life." And in the great poem published at the autumn fair, after pieces of Pythagorean metaphor such as, "the organs of a horse may await those of a man and all other creatures in regular or irregular progression," he immediately adds, "present organic death has nothing to do with the countless forms of enduring life. Were the Spirit but aware." 

1 Op. cit., ed. Tocco and Vitelli, ii.i, p. 2  
