The work is, however, chiefly filled with a selection of mystical and philosophical lore that aligns with the author’s own conceptions, along with a singular series of geometrical constructions based on a theory of distinct mathematical minima and the numerical mysteries of Pythagoras, all invested with metaphysical significance. One example is the perfect number, which serves as the source of infinite series.

One is De Monade, cap. vii, v. 128 sq.
2 De Occulta Philosophia. See Tocco, F; Fonti e Ricerche sulla Filosofia di G.B., in Accademia dei Lincei, Rediconto Sez., vi, p. 534.

Giordano Bruno

Even so does an infinity of worlds proceed from one substance.


Stance;  
the diversity of the universe and all its creatures being due to the union of the One and the Many.

III. ON IMMENSITY

"The De Immenso" is a very great book indeed. It is a prolonged hymn of wonder, praise, and intellectual exaltation, sung in the temple of immensity. Perhaps it may be ranked with the "Causa" as one of Bruno’s greatest works. Essentially in line with the explicit idealists of the early nineteenth century, he always tries to unite his idealism with scientific conceptions of the Universe.

The spirit of kinship with which he regards the starry host is that of a poet lately among us:

So may we read and little find them cold  
Not frosty lamps, illuminating dead space,  
Not distant aliens, not senseless Powers.  
The fire is in them whereof we are born,  
The music of their motion may be ours.

"De Immenso" is a restatement of the cosmic teaching of...


The great Italian works are often more detailed and precise. Like "De Minimo" and "De Monade," they consist of Latin verses with prose annotations thereon. Seven years had passed since the first bold attempts to furnish the world with a new cosmology. As presenting Bruno’s views in their final form, the work is of the highest importance. However, since these have been dealt with in the order in which they were given to the public, it is not necessary to do more than present a general notion of the work and set down indications of advance.

He says there is an incessant unfolding of Nature in motion. The scintillation of sun and stars is due to the rapidity of rotation but the phenomenon is not observable in planets.

Höffding, H.; "Hist. of Mod. Phil." Translated by Meyer, 1900, Vol. I, p. 139.

Meredith, G. "Meditation under the Stars," 240 GIORDANO BRUNO


He exhibits great interest in comets and shows that he was closely following the observations of the astronomers of his time. He casts aside the notion, which had prevailed since the time of Aristotle, that they were slowly burning vapors set aflame by the motion of the stars. Instead, he recognizes these wandering Arabs of the sky as genuine members of the cosmic system and subject to cosmic law. Meteors are also cosmic matter, wandering through space; they are living beings.

He had but a poor notion of the relative distances of the planets: he did not think Jupiter or Saturn could be much farther from the sun than Earth is, nor that their period of revolution could be much longer than our year.

Seven years before, he would seem to have believed the stars and planets to be eternal, though subject to vicissitude.


4. But now he says that only the Universe as a whole is eternal; its worlds decay and perish, their constituent parts entering into fresh combinations.

5. He attacks the superstitions interwoven with all religions, and especially the creed of those Catholics who put the Pope in the place of God.

6. He is still as filled with religious enthusiasm and poetic fire as when his eyes were first opened to transcendent truth; he rejoices now as then in the confident vision of an everliving, infinite universe and its innumerable choirs of flaming spirits dwelling under the reign of ever-unfolding, spiritual law.

It is worthy of note that he refers sympathetically and almost proudly to the daring sea-dogs of Britain who had. 

1 *De Immenso*, IV, vii, i, 1 sqq; IV,


Vi

I  
2  
I bid, V, I.
