
3  
I bid, V, vi I.  

4 Cena, Dialogo, Vinifitio, Dialogo II.  

5 De imminentis, II, v, 1 sqq.  

2  
I bid, I. 

THE GREAT LATIN POEM AND LAST BOOKS 241 braved the might of his own monarch, Philip of Spain.


And prevailed against him.

IV. ON IMAGES, SIGNS AND IDEAS

At the same autumn fair appeared the last work given to the world by Bruno himself. There is no record extant of permission for its publication, but it is mentioned, with the date of its appearance, in Bassäus’ Frankfurt Catalogue of 1592.

“The Arrangement of Images, Signs and Ideas” is preceded by a dedicatory letter to Heinrich Hainzel, the “distinguished and most generous” lord of Elgg. Bruno informs Hainzel that this is one of his most important works, having for its object the description of how images, signs, and ideas may be so ordered in the mind as to serve a general scheme for the discovery and arrangement of truths and for fixing them in memory.


The greater part of the treatise is in prose, but there are excursions into verse. There are three books; the first consists of two sections. The author extracts all that he considers of first importance from *De Umbris*, *Cantrii Cirensis*, and *Syllepsis*, condensing and improving without greatly altering. The work is indeed important, for although Neo-Platonic distinctions are adopted, Neo-Platonic doctrine is widely departed from, and a position is taken up which is, in essence, that of the great German Idealists.

"The simplest operations of arithmetic are very easy," he says, "yet to do these is to do everything; to say them is to say everything. Herein the whole light is more."

*De Immenso*, VI, xx.

*De Magia, Signorum et Idolatriae Comp*, Proff. Ap. Jo. Weckhrlin et P. Picquetum consorts, 1591. We know that it was the last work published at Frankfurt from *De Monada*, Cap. III.


Scholars from the work itself,

I I I , vi

It is present, clear, and obvious to our intelligence than is the outer light of the sun to the eyes. Shall I call it a power because so few know and understand it? Because the eye beholds other things, it does not see itself. But what is that eye which beholds other things in such a way that it may perceive itself! It is that eye which sees all things in itself, and which even is all things.

At the commencement of the book, we come across a passage where, couched in scholastic terminology, there is the identification of thought and thing, intellect and substance, memory and nature, knowledge and fact. Ideas are the


Cause of things prior to other things;  
the vestiges of ideas are the things themselves,  
that is to say, they exist in things.  
The shadows of ideas are derived from things, that is to say, they are subsequent upon them.

He again records his belief in mystic intuition, writing of the interior intuition which is both the light and that which it illumines. It differs from external intuition as a mirror that only reflects would from a mirror illuminated by its own nature wherein object and sensitive subject are one.

That same Pythagorean fallacy is repeated throughout all Bruno’s work and all the philosophy of his time, viz., since simple numbers can be clearly conceived and are without contradiction, they represent the...


The ultimate constitution of the universe possesses objective existence. He perceived the unity of the fine arts and understood that knowledge is a constructive art; one may infer from the following passage that he found keener enjoyment in sight than in hearing: “There are men who find harmony through the eye; others, though to a lesser measure, through the ear.” Prefatory letter to Hainzel. In "De Compositione," I, see i, o. 1.

Giordano Bruno observed will operative in Nature (voluntas naturalis) as a self-moving principle, intelligent and prescient. God is not merely transcendent; in fact, He operates through nature and is within nature. Therefore, thorough investigation of...


Nature can never give what is base or false. Philosophic truth is certitude, procurable by setting forth from the gates of sense. It cannot be at variance with theological truth, as the upholders of the Twofold Truth maintained, although the latter is given by revelation from a superior intelligence (*Summa sub umbra fidei*, VI). 

During his second and longer stay in Frankfurt, Bruno wrote with his own hand "The Fastenings Of Kind," which he never finished. A part of this was copied by Besler, probably at Padua, and details were added. Both manuscripts, discovered in Paris during the last century, are now preserved in Moscow with the other Noroff Manuscripts.

