This treatise is on Moral Science from an objective point of view; the passions are dealt with in the cold, detached manner of an impartial observer. The different kinds of love that bind the human spirit are discussed, and sexual...


Attraction is discussed in a singularly straightforward and naturalistic way, unrelieved by the smallest dash of sentiment. Here and there, passages from Italian works are repeated. As in De Magna, an attempt is made to reduce the attractions and repulsions found in Nature, as well as in human feelings and emotions, to two contrary principles: Love and Hate. As with Dante, Hate is regarded as Love inverted. After all these considerations, these two final contraries turn out to be one at the bottom.

Bruno opines that the fear of hell is more dreadful than the place itself would be; it acts as a powerful chain on the human mind through the imagination.

Tocco’s judgment of this quite unfinished work...


That it “shows an experience of life, a sobriety in speculation, and a delicacy of observation far from common.” 2  
1 Bruno Op. lat. aura T00006, Vi telli, I, p. 638.  
3 Tocco, F Op. ed. di G. B., p. 257.

CHAPTER XVI

AT VENICE AND PADUA  

There had been a time when the human spirit, braced by the discovery of ancient letters and a new world, enjoyed no small measure of freedom under Popes who were themselves distinguished sons of the Renaissance; but such liberty was never formally authorized and established. The shock which Protestant aggression gave to the Catholic conscience and the dwindling power and purse of the Roman theocracy had by this time caused a complete reversal of Papal policy.

Bruno, in spite of the persecution he had endured at the hands of minor officials, believed in the sweet reasonableness...


The necessity of a Church that often tacked and temporized in the past, even though it was governed by many wise statesmen and had the adherence of numerous scholars and sincere priests, seemed lost on him. Filled with his own sincerity and belief in the triumph of truth, the lessons from his life in Naples, Geneva, Paris, and Germany were overlooked. Candid, generous, and open-minded, he judged the rulers of the Church by his own high liberal standards and those of a few like-minded friends. He had no doubt about the genuine Catholicity of his beliefs, convinced that access to high authority would restore him to the bosom of his Church.

Mocenigo sent him more than one pressing invitation, probably promising ample protection. At length, after some misgiving and wavering back and forth, he acted on his desire.


Sigwart, op. cit., p. 30.

246  
248 GIORDANO BRUNO

Troops of Protestants might be observed making their way to the University or a tutor's rooms; these were not only students commonly brought up in our universities—mean men's children sent to school with hopes of living on hired learning—but predominantly sons of noblemen and the best gentlemen who studied more for knowledge and pleasure than for curiosity or gain.

The presence of wealthy students was advantageous to private lecturers. Moreover, a student was bound to no lectures nor anything else but what he himself chose to attend.

But many of them “listed.”


To rioting and feats of arms.

Bruno had Besler for company—Besler acted as his copyist. He met men he had known in Germany, and seemingly, also those from England. It's strange that he did not take alarm at what was being said about his presence in Italy! The scholars in Frankfurt marveled at his temerity.

What the Germans in Italy thought we may read in a passage of a letter written by Haventhal of Brandenburg (Valens Acidalius), who was studying at Bologna, to Michael Forgacz of Bavaria, who was at Padua. "Tell me," he asks in a letter dated January 21st, 1592, "tell me about another matter. It is said that Giordano Bruno the Nolan, whom you knew at Wittenberg, is living among you at Padua. Can this be so? What"


The manner of man is this: an exile, as he was used to admit, dare to re-enter Italy! I marvel, I marvel, nor can I believe it, although I have it from a sure source. Tell me,

1. Thomas, William; The History of Italy, a book exceeding profitable to be read, 1549, p. 2; quoted by Clare Howard, English Travellers of the Renaissance, 1904, p. 53.
   
2. Hoby, Sir Thomas: The Travels and Life of Sir T. H., written by himself, 1547-1564, Ed. E. Powell, Camden Society, Ser. iii, vol. iv, 1902, p. 10.

3. Ciotto


It's evident, Doc. Vol. 2: At Venice and Padua, this news—whether false or true—is widely discussed. We do not know how far Hav(e)ken(tal)'s astonishment extended to Italians; however, it is clear that many-tongued rumor was at work among Germans in Italy. On March 3rd, Hav(e)ken(tal) wrote: "I marvel no more concerning that sophist, for every day all sorts of incredible stories are reported here."

Bruno would seem to have felt no fear. He had been dwelling in freer lands than Italy and did not realize the changes effected by the enforcement of the decrees of Trent. Nay, he went on with studies which the Church regarded as at least questionable. He was employing Besler in copying "De Vinclis" and ancient, unprinted works; among them being the "Seals of Hermes and Ptolemy."

