
A work that was found in his possession in Venice is one he claimed had been praised by Albertus Magnus, the "Universal Doctor" of the Church. He confessed that he had not examined the contents of these books closely; indeed, this particular one he had not read. He was dealing with perilous material, preparatory to a study of judicial astrology.

Whether or not Mocenigo's taste for secret knowledge included hankerings after the Black Art is not apparent. He was eager to get Bruno into his house in Venice and offered tempting terms: “He would support me well and…”


I should be satisfied with him,” says Bruno. In a fatal hour, the unsuspecting thinker put his head into a noose. He accepted the offer of a treacherous and incapable dabbler, returned to Venice in March 1592, and took up his abode with Mocenigo in the little Campo of S. Samuele on the Grand Canal, just opposite the palace where our Browning died.

At first, it would seem that all went well. He frequented booksellers’ shops and chatted with the learned people whom he met there. Ciotto would seem to have heard no heretical talk, and Briccius said that Giovanni had not spoken to


him on such matters.

The fame of his abilities spread in Venice. There were literary clubs of a social character there as elsewhere in Italy, and the most distinguished circle was wont to assemble at the hospitable house of Andrea Morosini, the historian, who was now "in the middle of the journey of our life"—he was 35. Here were to be met all the cultivated patricians, Fra Paolo Sarpi, the famous printers, and every Venetian of note interested in things of the mind. 

Morosini was a broad-minded Catholic, and from the leanings of some of his guests, he may have given his evidence with due caution and reservation. Anyhow, he related at the trial that "For some months past certain philosophical books had been on sale at Venetian bookstores bearing the name of Giordano Bruno, a man reputed to be of varied learning. I understood from what I heard in Venice and from what Gio. Battista (Ciotto), the bookseller, said to diverse gentlemen, and especially to my...".


Self, that this man was here and that we might desire to get him to our house, where certain gentlemen and also prelates are wont to come for the discussion of literature and above all of philosophy. Wherefore I said that he should get him to come; and he did so several times, debating on various learned matters. I have never been able to infer from his reasonings that he held any opinion contrary to the faith, and, so far as I am concerned, I have always considered him to be a Catholic—and at the least suspicion of the contrary, I should not have allowed his presence in my house.

Many patricians and literary people gathered together, especially one on the seven liberal arts, together with other works of mine that are both confirmed and those I did not.  

Giordano Bruno


He expressed, which he did not confirm, and placed himself at the feet of His Beatitude (for he had heard that His Beatitude loves upright men), in order to explain his case and try to be absolved for his misbehavior. He sought permission to wear the clerical habit free from monastic authority, a subject upon which he had spoken during these last days to many Neapolitan Fathers of his order who were present—rather a perilous proceeding, perhaps! Specifically, Father Superior Fra Domenico of Nocera, Father Serafino of Nocera, Father Giovanni (whose origin was unknown except that it was within the Kingdom of Naples), and another from Atripalda. This individual had left off his habit but resumed it; he did not know his name. In religion, he was called Brother Felice.

He repeated to his judges his desire to return to the Church.


To be relieved of the bonds of monastic obedience.

In a singularly cramped handwriting, there is confirmation of Bruno’s statement. Father Domenico wrote: In this very month of May, on the Holy Feast of Pentecost, as I was coming out of the Sacristy of the Church of St. John and St. Paul, I observed a layman bow to me. At first, I did not know him; but when he spoke to me saying, “Come into a private place,” I remembered him as one of our brethren in the province of the kingdom, a man of letters, Brother Giordano of Nola by name.

We withdrew to a quiet place in the aforementioned church, and there he told me the reason for his leaving our province and the cause of his unfrocking; being excommunication by Fra Domenico Vita, Provincial at the time. He told me of his sojournings in many kingdoms and at royal courts and of his important studies in grammar, rhetoric, and dialectics, as well as other subjects.


Rivium, or arithmetic, mathematics, astronomy, and music.

2 Doc. IX.
3 Doc. XVI

AT VENICE AND PADUA 253

He worked in lecturing but always lived as a Catholic. When I asked him what he did in Venice and how he subsisted, he said that he had been in Venice only for a very short time and had sufficient means of his own; he wished to live quietly and set about writing a book he had in mind. Through important patronage, he would present it to His Beatitude and obtain his pardon together with satisfaction of conscience for what he had told me. He hoped to stay in Rome, devote himself to literature, show what he was made of, and perhaps deliver some lectures.

During Lent, he seems


To have gone frequently to the noble church of St. John and St. Paul, the Westminster Abbey of Venice, as well as to the smaller medieval church of S. Stefano close by his quarters. These efforts are quite interpretable. The original thinker had found no country which was not hostile to new ideas.

After his stormy experience, he sought a haven in the Church to which he had once given love that he had never quite lost—a church that had ennobled itself through periods of tolerance and even by active help in the liberation of the human spirit. Above all, he desired to return to his beloved district—my Province—without the odium of apostasy but at no price with the renewal of cloistered life and discipline.

He says that he confided this desire to Mocenigo as well as to Fra Domenico, and “he promised to help me in all things which were right.” Blind belief that all men who might appear friendly towards him were no less sincere and single-minded than himself! Filled with his own ideas, he relaxed whatever modicum of caution he had exercised in Venice during the intimacy of guest and teacher.


With host Strozzi, I gave the youthful traveler, Henry Wotton, excellent advice when he told him to “keep an open countenance and a shut mouth” as he traveled through Italy. 

Bruno said far too much to a man of just sufficient intelligence to misunderstand and misrepresent him; one whose affectation of a love for learning, friendliness, and generosity disguised a stupid, superstitious mind, a treacherous heart, and a mean, sordid disposition. Such blindness is well-nigh inconceivable.

