Either, with depraved religious zeal, perhaps at the instigation of the Inquisition, Mocenigo had set a trap for Bruno and enticed him from Germany to hand him over to the Holy Office when he had accumulated sufficient evidence; or he was dissatisfied with the lessons he received. He may have hankered after instruction in the Black Arts.


And taken mean revenge when he found this not forthcoming. Probably, in any case, Mocenigo's confessor had something to do with his action and took advantage of the pupil's discontent to egg him on and to direct his procedure. The reader will be able to form his own surmise from the facts to be produced.

Mocenigo wrote to the Inquisitors: "I am compelled by my conscience and the order of my confessor." And again: "Since you have favored me with so much forbearance by pardoning my error in delaying my tardy accusation, I pray you to excuse it before these illustrious lords; since my intention was good. For I could not get at the whole matter at once; nor did I know the vileness of the man until I had kept him in my house for some two months and then I desired to get the better of him, and by my dealings with him could be certain that he would not make."


Without my knowledge. Thus I have always assured myself of being able to make him come under the censure of the Holy Office. This I have succeeded in.

I "pen sier i stretti e il v iso s ciolto," Wotton, Sir Life and Letters, ed. L. Peersall Smith, Oxford, 1907, vol. i, p. 382.

Document 1.
256 GIORDANO BRUNO

Mocenigo, bent on betrayal, went to Ciotto. Booksellers had to be careful, for their avocation was somewhat dangerous. Although many works highly objectionable to the Church were sold quite freely; the State being by no means so subservient to ecclesiastical authority as to interfere rashly with a trade which added to the riches and reputation of the Commonwealth. Being learned men, they knew something about the contents of their wares. Ciotto certainly, and Britanus probably, had Bruno.


Ciotto’s books were on their shelves before the Inquisition. Such witnesses might have faltered at that time. If they gave evidence favorable to the prosecution, they might need to explain selling heretical books; if perceived as favoring the accused, they could find themselves in the same situation. The evidence from Ciotto and Brixtanus suggests they stated what they knew faithfully and simply.

Ciotto said: “I was about to start for the Frankfurt Fair last Easter when Signor G. Mocenigo found me and asked if I were going there. He mentioned, ‘I have him (meaning Giordano) here at my expense. He has promised to teach me many things and has received a quantity of clothes and money from me on this account. I can bring him to no conclusion. I doubt whether he is quite trustworthy. Since you are going to Frankfurt, keep this in mind, and do me the service to find out if anyone has faith in him and if he will carry out his promises.’”


By reason of this, when I was in Frankfurt, I spoke with several scholars who had attended his lectures while he was in that city and were acquainted with his method and discourse. What they told me amounted to this: Giordano made strong professions of memory and other similar secrets, but success with anyone was never seen, and his pupils in this matter and others similar to it were far from satisfied. They said more. They did not know how he could remain in Venice, for he is regarded as a man without religion. This is all I gathered, and I told it to Ser Giovanni when I returned from the fair, whereupon he replied,

"I also had my doubts of this; but I wish to find out what I can draw from him of the instructions he has promised me, not to lose altogether what I have given him, and then I shall hand him over to the censure of the Holy Office."

I Mocenigo also pumped the Flemish bookseller, Brictanus, and declared that he, “in particular,”


of him, declaring him to be an enemy of Christianity and our faith, and that he had heard him utter great heresy. 

Brictanus, when examined, utterly refuted this statement.

According to his own account, the pious patrician’s next step was to consult his confessor, who advised him to denounce Bruno to the Inquisition. Any feeble-minded, muddle-headed intriguer could set its terrible, remorseless machinery in motion. 

Bruno seems to have become aware that mischief was brewing. He tried to slip through the net which was closing in. He considered that he had discharged even more than all the obligations he owed his host. He told his judges: "I therefore resolved to return to Frankfurt and get certain of my works printed, so last Thursday (May 21, 1551) I took leave."


Of him to go away, and according to what he said, he believed I was not going to Frankfurt, but to teach what I have taught him and others. He insisted on my remaining, but I was equally set on going. He began to complain that I had not taught him what I promised. Then he used threats, saying he would find means, if I did not remain of my own free will, to compel me. Next night (Friday), seeing that I was determined to go and that I had settled up my affairs and arranged for the transit of my belongings to Frankfurt, after I had gone to bed, he came in on the pretext of wishing to speak to me.


And was followed by his servant, Bartolo, and, if I mistake not, five or six others whom I believe to be gondoliers of the neighborhood. They made me get up and brought me to a garret where they locked me in. Ser Gion himself said that if I would remain and teach him the terms for the memory of words and geometry as he had required from the first, he would have me set free; but if not, there would be very unpleasant results. 

I replied that it always seemed to me that I had taught him enough and more than I engaged for, and that I was far from deserving such treatment. He left me there until the following day when a captain entered with men whom I did not know, and made them take me to a cellar in the basement where they left me until nighttime, when another captain came with his squadron and brought me to the prisons of the Holy Office.

Later on, Bruno declared: “He not only wished me to teach him all I know, but desired to learn what I am unable to teach anyone, and has constantly threatened me in life and honor if I did not give him my knowledge.”

Mocenigo impounded all Bruno's.


Money, clothes, manuscripts, and books were handed over to the Inquisition. One Matteo Antonio, a captain under the Council of Ten, effected the arrest and removed him to the Prison of the Inquisition, located behind the walls of the prison, to the west of the Bridge of Sighs and facing the Ducal Palace. On that very day, May 23rd, Mocenigo had denounced his guest to His Very Reverend Paternity, the Father Inquisitor for Venice.

The small-brained man is usually crafty and malicious. There is an abundance of stupid misunderstanding, artful perversion, and odious fabrication in the three documents (Doc. vii; Doc. xiv). Giordano Bruno claimed that all the doctors knew nothing, and he could enlighten the first theologians in the world so they would be unable to reply.

Mocenigo then says that Bruno told him...


The Inquisitors at Rome had prepared 130 charges, and he made off while they were being presented because it was said that he threw his accuser—or whom he believed to be such—into the Tiber. He adds that Cioccolanti, Brictanus, and Morosini can confirm his statements. He believes Bruno is possessed by a devil, asks for a speedy trial, and presents three printed works by the accused and a manuscript "On the Deduction of the Universal Predicates of Genealogies" and certain hasty memoranda made by himself.

