the Holy Tribunal met to  
consider the case of Bruno. The judges were Laurentio Priuli,  
the Patriarch, who had been Venetian Ambassador at Paris during Bruno's first visit ten years before and may have heard of or even seen him there; Ludovico Taverna, the Apostolic Nuncio; the Very Reverend Father Giovanni Gabrielle of Saluzzo; and Aloysio Fuscari, the Assessor. Ciotto, having been sworn, gave evidence which, so far as his direct knowledge of Bruno went, was wholly favourable. But he had heard the prisoner spoken ill of at Frankfurt. That was all he knew or could say concerning it.


Concerning Giordano; if he knew more, he would tell it. As was customary, he was sworn to silence and the Court rose.

It did not reassemble until Friday, the 29th, and was composed of the same members as before. Britannus, the Flemish bookseller, an older man than Ciotto by twelve years, knew nothing at all of Bruno's views except hearsay. After adjournment for the mid-day meal, Bruno was brought in. He had lain three days in his cell. The Clerk of the Court describes him as of ordinary height, with a chestnut-colored beard and looking his age, about 40. Ciotto had described him as little, slenderly built, with a black beard.

We know from Eglin and Alsted that he accompanied his earnest and rapid speech with lively gestures; he had the changing expression of a Southern Italian. Admonished to tell the truth before cross-examination, he burst out, “I shall tell the truth. Often have I been threatened with the Holy...”


Office and I deemed it a joke, so I am quite ready to furnish an account of myself. Then, in answer to questions, he commenced that story of his life and wanderings which has been incorporated into these chapters until the hour was late, when he was sent back to his place with the usual warning.

The Inquisitor required Mocenigo to furnish more matter; he must write down with extreme carefulness all that Bruno had said against our Catholic faith. The document is a subtle commingling of truth with its distortion. Dated the same day as Bruno’s first examination, it affirms that Bruno had pronounced the priesthood degenerate from Apostolic practice, manifesting violence and not love towards heretics. The world could not remain in ignorance and without a good religion. Truly, the Catholic religion was more acceptable to him than others.

But all needed much reform. Soon, the world would take its own reformation upon itself, for it could not continue so corrupt. He hoped much from the King of Navarre and therefore was anxious to publish his works and gain credit; he intended to lead that coming time. He would not always be poor but would enjoy the goods of others.

There is greater ignorance than ever before, since men now teach what they do not understand—namely, that God is a Trinity, which is impossible and blasphemous against the Majesty of God. When I told him to be silent and hasten on with what he had to do for me because I was a Catholic and he a Lutheran, and I could not abide him, he replied, "Oh, you will see what your faith will do for you," and laughing, "await the Judgment when the dead shall arise; you will get the reward of your righteousness."

On another occasion, he said, "This Republic has a reputation for great wisdom; it should deal..."


with the monastic revenues in the French manner; there, the nobles enjoy the monastic revenues and the friars live on broth. The friars of today are all asses, and letting them enjoy so much wealth is a great sin.

(This stroke was certain to tell.)

“Also he told me that ladies pleased him well; but he had not yet reached Solomon’s number; the Church sinned in making a wickedness of what was of great service in Nature and which, in his view, was highly meritorious.”

Next day, Saturday 30th May, Bruno was again fetched from prison. The Apostolic Nuncio was represented by his vicar, Dom Livio Passero. Bruno, having been sworn to tell the truth, continued the concise, matter-of-fact and...


A straightforward story of his life, making natural mistakes here and there about the length of time he stayed at this or that place. Parenthetically, he observes that he does not endorse all the works he has written—a statement which he repeats later on, adding: "I have uttered myself and handled matters too philosophically, wrongly, not sufficiently after the manner of a good Christian, and, in particular, I have taught and maintained in some of these works philosophical doctrines concerning what, according to the Christian faith, should be attributed to the power, wisdom, and goodness of God; founding my doctrine on sensible experience and reason and not on faith." 

He goes on to say, probably in reply to a question: "This is a general observation for details. I will look up my writings; for I cannot now recollect any particular passages or teachings; but I will reply to questions as they shall come back to me."

We gather, then,


That he was allowed to refer to the seized books. After a lengthy sitting, he was given the customary serious warning and taken back to his cell.

The next day, the officers of the Inquisition obtained a deposition from Fra Domenico, which confirmed Bruno's statements about their conversation together. The Court sat again on June 2. Another State Assessor, one Sebastian, participated in this session.

Bruno argued that the universe is infinite as a result of the infinite divine power. He believed it unworthy of divine goodness and power to have produced merely one finite world when it was able to bring into being an infinity of worlds. Therefore, he expounded on the idea that there is an endless number of individual worlds like our Earth. Bruno regarded this concept, with Pythagoras, as a star; the moon, the planets, and the stars are similar.


It, the latter being of endless number. All these bodies make an infinity of worlds; they constitute the infinite whole in infinite space—an infinite universe, that is to say, containing innumerable worlds. So that there is an infinite measure in the universe and an infinite multitude of worlds. But this may be indirectly opposed to truth according to the faith.

Within this universe, I place a universal Providence whereby everything lives, grows, acts, and abides in its perfection. And I understand this in a two-fold way: one after the fashion of the Spirit, which is completely present in the whole body and in every part thereof. This I call Nature, the shadow and record of the Divine. The other manner is the inconceivable way in which God—an essence, presence, and power—is in all and above all, not as part, not as spirit, but unspeakably.

Now, I understand all attributes to be one and the same in Deity, and with theologians and the greatest thinkers,


I conceive of three attributes: power, wisdom, and goodness, or mind (intuitive Power), “comprehension and Love.” Things are through mind; they are ordered and distinct through intellect; they are in harmonious proportion through universal love, in all and above all. There is nothing that does not shine in being, any more than anything is beautiful without the presence of beauty; wherefore, nothing can exist shorn from the divine presence.

But distinctions in the Divinity are made by the method of discursive thought and are not reality.

I understand, with Aristotle, that all which exists depends on the First Cause. To call it a "creation" is not correct, as...


