Traditionally, as St. Thomas explains, whether understood as external or internal, all is the effect of the first Cause and is not independent.

Bruno next supports himself by quotations from Holy Writ and Virgil to reconcile the doctrine of the Trinity with his philosophy. The attribute or essential characteristic which the Church calls the Father is Will or Power; the Son or the Word is intellect, understanding; the Holy Spirit is love—the life of the universe, the Soul of the World, whence issues all that has life. All things, souls and bodies, are immortal as to their substance, nor is there any other death than dispersion and reintegration.

Asked if he held Father, Son, and Spirit to be One in Essence but distinct Persons, he replied that he had doubted in private concerning the distinct personalities of the two latter. Indeed, the term Person was declared by St. Augustine to have been new in his time. He had doubted the doctrine from his eighteenth year but had never denied it.


for or taught or written against it. Asked if he had doubts concerning the First Person, he replied: "Never; I have always held the doctrine of a faithful Christian in that regard." In answer to interrogatories, he said he had doubted and wrestled in spirit concerning the incarnation but had never doubted that the Son was one in essence with the First Person. He would seem to use the term substance in its Aristotelian logical sense to express substrate or the ingredient, one knows not what, of concrete being as such, and not in the scholastic sense of the nature of the individual thing.

He had merely quoted [references missing].


The opinions of Arius in his youth at Naples were considered those of Arius. The time had come to adjourn for the mid-day meal, and Bruno was taken back to his cell after the invariable warning. On reassembling, the Nuncio was represented by his Vicar, as he had been on May 30th, and the Patriarch by his Vicar.

Questioned, Bruno repeated his admission that much objectionable material might be extracted from his works, but he never had impugned the Catholic faith. He had always claimed to reason by natural intelligence and not as a theologian. He had reasoned philosophically and had merely quoted the heretical opinions of others. 

He reiterated that he had gravely doubted the Word becoming flesh. The examination being pushed further, he said: “To make clearer what I said this morning, I have held and believed that there is a distinct Godhead in the Father, in the Word, and in Love, which is the Divine Spirit; and, in essence, these three are one; but I have never been able...”


To grasp the concept of three really being Persons has been doubted. Augustine says, "we utter the name of Person with dread when we speak of divine matters, and use it because we are obliged; nor have I found the term applied in the Old or New Testament."

As to the Incarnation, he thought the Divine Word was present in the humanity of Christ; but he could never comprehend the union of the Infinite Real with the finite in the way body and soul are one single reality. He swayed as to the ineffable manner thereof, without doubt about the authority of Scripture which declares the Word was made flesh.

The rational soul does not pass from body to body, but goes to Paradise, Purgatory, or Hell; however, I have thought deeply, as a Philosopher, how, since the soul does not exist without a body and does not exist independently in the body.


It may pass from body  
to body even as matter may pass from mass to mass; which,  
if not true, bears a close resemblance to the opinion of  
Pythagoras. It is obvious that he would claim for the  
initiated the right to hold theological doctrine in a different  
sense from that in which the uninitiated take it.  

Whereupon the Court puts the sardonic question:  
“Are you a skilled theologian and acquainted with Catholic  
decisions?”  

Answer: Not much, having pursued philosophy, which has been my avocation.”  

Had he poured scorn on theologians! No; on the contrary, he had  
condemned Protestant teachings so far as they departed from those of Rome, and had always upheld the theologians of the Church, St. Thomas Aquinas before all. He had read heretical books and animadverted on them. As to the doctrine of good works, he quoted passages from his own writings, which maintained that works, no less than faith, were necessary for salvation. Since he gave the precise page, it is evident that the books lay on the table or that he was allowed them in his cell for the preparation of his defense.


Had he said that monks did not make their lives conform to those of the apostles? I have said nothing of the kind nor held that view. With this, says the Inquisitorial record, “he threw up his hands and was agitated because such questions were asked of him.”

The judge-prosecutors pushed him hard with Mocenigo’s charges, which they brought forward one by one. It is true. Later in the examination, he attributes to Joachim of Flora a doctrine which Joachim expressly repudiated.

The Causa is erroneously inserted for the Spaccio in the manuscript.

THE TRIAL 73

Bruno remembered saying that the preaching, example, and miracles of the Apostles effected more than the Church’s appeal to force today does; but his works showed that.


He supported the discipline of the Church against heresy. Closely pressed as to the different method of the Church in Apostolic times, he replied that perhaps hearts were harder today, and so, although there were exemplary Christians, our wicked and perverse generation would not listen.

Asked if Christ wrought His miracles by magic, he raised both hands and cried out: "What is this? Who invented these devilries? I have never even thought such a thing. O God! What is this! I would rather be dead than have said anything of the kind."

The gibe concerning the Last Judgment which Mocenigo attributed to him was then brought up, and Bruno exclaimed: “I have never said these things. My Lord, look through my books. They are profane enough; but you will not find a trace of this; nor has it entered my head.”

