
Asked about carnal sin, he had spoken of fornication as the smallest of such sins and joked about it in frivolous company. He had never blamed the Church for its moral code but accepted its teachings on the subject.

Changing the subject, the Court then informed Bruno that he must not be surprised at the questions being asked because he had dwelt in heretical countries, had many dealings with heretics, and had attended their sermons. Such was their comprehension of his impressionability and lack of personal force as a great original thinker before them! He had admitted enough to make the allegations against him credible. These were enumerated. Let him take heed and make full, open, and faithful confession in order to be received into the bosom of Holy Mother Church and become a member of Jesus Christ.

But it would be a marvel if persistence in his obstinate denial did not lead to the usual end for the impenitent. The Holy Office was... 

GIORDANO BRUNO


Desirous of bringing to light, by its piety and Christian love, those who were in darkness, and of deliverance from the crooked way to the straight path of eternal life. At last it must have been clear, even to Bruno, that the noose was tightening.

“So may God pardon me,” he replied, “every one of my answers to every question has been true so far as my memory has served me; but, for my greater satisfaction, I will again pass my life in review, and if I have said or done anything against the Catholic Christian Faith, I will frankly confess it. I have said what is just and true, and I shall continue to say it. I am certain the contrary shall never be proved against me.” He put a vastly different interpretation on the Catholic Christian Faith and what he had written about it than that of the Church itself.

Next day (June 3rd), the Court reassembled, the Patriarch...


And Nuncio being again represented by their vicars, the interrogatories of the previous day were read over. Bruno was asked if he were guilty with regard to any of the charges indicated. He replied that he had indeed broken fasts, which were not kept by heretics, because he did not know the appointed days except when among Catholics. He had scruples but said punctilious observance would have excited ridicule. He believed every faithful Catholic should adhere to the Calendar; however, he called God to witness that his non-adherence was not due to despising such Observances. He attended the sermons of Protestants out of intellectual curiosity and had never sat with heretics at their breaking of bread or other usages.

When pushed on this point, Bruno replied: “Wherein I have erred, I have told the truth, and you will never find that this is not so. There are plenty of Catholics in those parts who drop their own religious Observances without becoming heretics.”

Cross-examined for him (Bruno), he was asked about lecturing publicly, which had been allowed by the former king. Regarding his compliment to Elizabeth, he noted that if he had called her diva, he had also referred to Rudolf II as divus. He had no recollection of more.


Of having said that he wished to be "captain" and secure the wealth of others; his was no martial disposition, and what he wanted was not wealth but to follow philosophy and the sciences.

Throughout the day, the Court had repeated, in varied forms, questions which had been asked before and to which the prisoner had surely replied sufficiently. It was now demanded of him if he abjured and hated his heresies. 

Bruno answered: "I hate and detest all the errors I have at any time committed as regards the Catholic Faith and decrees of Holy Church, and I repent having done, held, said, believed, or doubted anything contrary to it. I pray this Holy Tribunal that, aware of my infirmity, it will admit me into the bosom of the Church, providing me with remedies proper for salvation and showing mercy."

We shall see how he received both.


The facts regarding his flight from Naples were extracted from him and he was moved to his cell.

At a short session the next day, attended by the Nuncio, Patriarch, Father Inquisitor, and State-Assessor Barbadiño, the evidence was read over to Bruno. He replied that it was accurately reported and had nothing to add. When asked about divination, he explained regarding the transcription found among his belongings. When questioned if he had an enemy, he could think of none except Mocenigo, against whose brutal and vindictive behavior he inveighed, exposing what he supposed to be its cause.

1 Doc. xiv. The examination of Bruno is given in Berti, Docs. vii, ix, xi, xii.


The Trial 277

It was not until three weeks later that the judges reassembled, with Thomas Morosini now representing the State. The prisoner was not brought before the Court; instead, the entirely favorable deposition of the distinguished patrician and scholar, Andrea Morosini, was taken. Ciotto was called and confirmed Bruno’s statement that he intended to present a book he was writing directly to the Pope.

After two tedious months in a prison cell—doubly lacerating for a spirit so enamored of freedom and restlessness—not to mention the doubt and dread which would attend any solitary prisoner of the Inquisition, Bruno was brought again before the same authorities as on the last occasion, with the addition of a second State Assessor. He was asked if, having had time to reflect, he could tell the truth.


No, he had nothing to add. He was informed that his protracted and contumacious apostasy placed him under grave suspicion of the Holy See (so there had been communications with the Pope and Curia). Perhaps there was more than appeared behind the statements he had made. He must purge his conscience.

The prisoner replied that his confessions and writings were indeed such as to rouse suspicions of heresy; he had always felt remorse and wished to amend his ways, wherefore he had sought a less irksomatic path than that of returning to strict monastic rule and had hoped to make himself acceptable to His Holiness, so as to live in more freedom, yet as a Catholic priest. There had been no slight intended on the Faith, but dread of the rigors of the Holy Office and love of liberty.

But he was told, “Had your desire been sincere you would not have lived so long in France and other Catholic countries and here in Venice without having consulted some prelate whereas you went on teaching false and heretical doctrine up to now.”

Bruno referred to Docs. xv, xvi.


**Giordano Bruno**

To prove that he had indeed consulted prelates and Catholic Fathers, Giordano Bruno presented himself before his judges. His conduct in Venice had been without fault; he had engaged in discussions on philosophy with many patricians, as his judges could verify. He expressed disapproval of Protestantism and sought absolution so he could continue living among the monks of his native province, rather than being cloistered.

