Bruno believed only Mocenico was accusing him. When told that he had been an apostate for a long time and had dwelt many years among heretics, potentially making him wicked, he replied that though he might have erred more than he could recall, he truly searched himself thoroughly for faults but found none. He readily confessed all he knew of; he was in their Lordships’ hands and did not know what the necessary penalty might be. However, he was ready with his soul to receive it.

Bruno's great scheme involved reaching the ear of an enlightened audience.


Pope through high influence and the presentation of an explanatory and illuminating book had failed, like all his many attempts to reconcile himself with the Church. Traitorously delivered to the Inquisition, at first he felt little or no fear, for he was convinced of his own integrity and blindly self-assured of his own essential Catholicity. But now he felt with the Theban King:

"All I can touch is falling, falling round me, and o'erhead
Intolerable destiny descends."

He cast himself on the mercy of the Inquisition. Falling on his knees, he humbly demanded pardon of God and the Court. Might any punishment be given privately, so that public disgrace would not attach to the habit he had worn? If his life were spared, he promised to reform it as to...

**CHAPTER XIX  
BRUNO AND THE INQUISITORS: THE REPUBLIC AND THE POPE**

Let us pause to examine a little more closely the conduct of the Inquisition and the line taken by the prisoner.


Like the proceedings of the Venetian Three, those of the Inquisition were shrouded in secrecy and silence, and the Court was shielded by the terror it inspired. Every witness and every official was muzzled by a sacred oath. Morosini in his history makes no mention of Bruno. The judges allowed their prisoner no advocate; the onus of proving his innocence fell on him alone. But he had no means of communicating with the outer world; the names of his accuser and witnesses were withheld from him, and he was given no opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses, who were heard and questioned by the Court only. His prosecutors were also his judges, and they were past masters in the art of luring the victim into making some fatal admission. They were ecclesiastics who professed that the sufferings of our mortal life weigh as nothing compared with eternal blessedness or the tortures of the damned.

“Eternum servans sub pectore vulnus,” Eternal Justice gave authority for the suppression of …


Humaner instincts for losing those primitive instincts.

1. Lea, J. C., *History of Inquisition in Spain*, 1906, vol. i, p. 470.
2. Masi ni, Eliseo, *Sacra Arsenale ovvero Pratica dell’Officio della Santa Inquisizione*, Bologna, 1665.

Bulls of Innocent IV, *Cum Nocumentum* and *Licet Sicut Accepi Mus*. 280  
BRUNO AND THE INQUISITORS 81

The court acted with caution and honest intention according to its lights. The inquisitors practically restricted their inquiry to the charges contained in Mocenigo’s denunciations and conducted it with as much moderation as was usual in the civil courts of the period.

The Court was more painstaking than many a modern one.


Court of Justice. The case presented difficult points, so the prisoner's philosophical doctrines were lightly skimmed over. Perhaps they were "merely put aside for the present." The judges would naturally be perplexed and it may be for this reason that they communicated with Rome.

Unlike the rebel-churches, the heretrix of Imperial Rome has always secured by organization and subordination that its ministers shall deal only with those matters in which they are fully competent. On the whole, the depositions would seem to have been carefully and accurately recorded. They were read over to the prisoner, who thus had opportunities of discovering and correcting any injurious mistake.

An easy evasion by Bruno of the charge of having broken his obligation to celibacy was fought shy of by the judges; for sexual im


Morality, even in the priesthood, was never pursued during the Counter-Reformation, or at any time, with that implacable rancor with which heresy was hunted down.

1 Doc. xvi

Fiorentino; Lettera al Prof. Spaventa, Giornale Nap., N.S., 1879, pp. 450-451.

Peccant nuns, however, were far more severely dealt with. An examination of the Index Expurgatorius today will show that its great object is not the suppression of vicious literature but anything which impugns the authority or doctrine of the Church.

282 GIORDANO BRUNO

But, as the trial proceeds, we find the attitude of the judges becoming more and more sinister; accusations are brought up again when they have been answered and apparently disposed of. Less and less is the mask of impartiality.


Partiality was maintained.

What was Bruno's attitude? The Canon Law recognized two sorts of apostasy—a fidei and a mandatis—those of unbelief and violating monastic vows. He considered himself guilty only of the latter, which was within the sole jurisdiction of his Order, and the Inquisition had nothing to do with it.

