
During this barbarity, a notary took down what the sufferer said, and, if he were silent, torture was re-applied. The mildest punishment is detailed in Roman Docs iii. Luigi Anibale Due Artisti ed un sovra natore at Atti della R. Acc. delle Sc. Mor. Pol., Napoli.


---

xxi v, pp. 468 sq.

3 Archivio della R. Società Romana di Storia Patria, vi, p. 344 sq.

Levi, D.G. Brunori, Torino, 1887, p. 369:  
293

294 GIORDANO BRUNO  

What an apostate monk might hope for was perpetual imprisonment. The Inquisitors were instructed to be merciful. Their manual speaks of the Institution as not desiring the death of the sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live.

The earliest of the documents still preserved in the Archives of the Holy Office at Rome bears the date Jan. 14. The Congregation consisted of eight cardinals, seven coadjutors, and the official notary. Eight heretical propositions had been extracted from Bruno's books and from the process by the Commissary and Bellarmine. These were read, and it was decided that certain ones, not named in the document, should be selected.


So that it might be seen whether he would abjure them, a search was to be made in the process and his works for other heretical propositions.

Among the Congregation were Cardinal Santoro di Santa Severina and the great Jesuit luminary Robert Bellarmin. Santoro had been a candidate for the Papacy; so sure was he of election that he had chosen his title—the same assumed by his rival Aldobrandini—though his naturally bitter temperament was not thereby improved.

Bellarmin was one of the first learned men to weaken the medieval conception of Papal empire, but he was unaware of the real nature and importance of the new principles he invoked. He was always ready to employ his vast erudition and intellectual dexterity in the service of obscurantism; it was he who took the main responsibility upon himself for denouncing the Copernican theory, who distinguished himself by persecuting Sarpi and Galileo, and who added certain works on Natural Science by distinguished men to the Index.

1 Sacro Arsenale ovvero Pratica dell' Officio della S. Inquisizione, Bologna, 1665, p.294.


2 Given in Bertius's *Vita di G. B.* 1886, p. 441.

296 GIORDANO BRUNO

To refute Mocenigo and that the works published abroad were sent for and carefully examined, which would take time.

1 As McIntyre remarks, the books were not hard to come by, and it would not require six years to find enough material to condemn him if that were desired. But was it desired, ardently desired! Fanatics may be, and often are, conscientious and painstaking; the doctrine of the Two-fold truth was not yet officially condemned. The relationship philosophy should bear to theology, a thorny subject not officially determined, and Clement was by nature conciliatory and diplomatic, one who would perceive the value of demonstrating by example the liberal bearing of Rome towards thinkers. Could Bruno but be brought to bridle his tongue and make himself subservient to the authority of that Church which he had never renounced.

Brunnhofer thinks that the


“Seven Liberal Arts” may have already been written and proved somewhat acceptable to Clement as providing a plausible alliance between philosophy and religion. There could hardly have been anyone at once so powerful and so friendly to Bruno as to intervene on his behalf. Perhaps some of the Princes of the Church perceived the essential sincerity of the man in believing he was genuinely Catholic, along with the strength of his desire for reconciliation. However, in the absence of documents, speculation is idle. The Church has never acted precipitately; its wont is to await the unfolding of events and act at the appropriate season. And doubtless it had its own good reasons for delay.

Forty days had been granted, but more than nine and a half months were allowed to pass—evidence both of the prisoner's skillful dialectic, courage, and firmness, and the no less persistent effort of the theologians. (Gentile G. B., in "Storia della cultura," 1907, p. 75.)


THE ROMAN PRISON: FINAL SCENES 297

For the times, the lenity shown was phenomenal. However, it must be noted that the Inquisitor's manual directs:

"If the culprit denies the indictments and these are not fully proved, and if during the term assigned to him to prepare his defense he has not cleared himself from the imputations which result from the process, it is necessary to have the truth out of him by a rigorous examination."

The case of Campanella shows what "rigorous examination" meant. Whether the sardonic irony of torture was applied to the man who had sung of heroic enthusiasm and held it the acme of human greatness to rise above all sensibility to pain, we do not know. If so, he remained...


Steadfast and unsubdued. On December 1st, Bruno was brought in person before the Congregation, which numbered nine cardinals, six coadjutors, and the notary. He was "heard concerning all his pretensions." He said that he ought not to renounce nor will he do so; there is nothing for him to renounce, and he knows not what he should renounce. The very illustrious were still patient (Santoro and Bellarmine were among them); they ordered that his "blind and false doctrine" should be made manifest to him and appointed Hypolitus Maria and Paulus Vicarius to deal with the said brother and point out to him the propositions to be abjured, so that he may recognize his errors and amend and recant; and do him all the good they can as soon as possible.


The Pope himself presided at a Congregation held on January 20, 1600. It was reported that Bruno was resolved not to abjure, asserting that he had never propounded any heretical doctrines and had been badly interpreted by the servants of the Holy Office. An appeal of his to the Pope was presented and opened but not read.

Among the Catholic dignitaries who visited and failed to convince Bruno were Cardinal Baronius and Clement.
