

was present at this occasion. He recorded Jordan’s last words before execution as follows: “I am well content, my Lord, with all your judgments.” The Pope, who had himself pronounced the death sentence on Jordan, was present, together with Cardinals Bellarmine and Baronius.

In 1616, a number of works by Galileo were placed on the Index of prohibited books. This action was prompted chiefly by an edition published in Florence in 1615 containing two dialogues of Galileo’s on motion and a letter to Castelli, which had already been examined by Rome in 1611. In that year it was decided that some passages required correction. Galileo must also have been aware of the condemnation of Jordan by the Inquisition as early as February 1616.

On June 12, 1615, he was invited to go to Rome for an audience with Pope Paul V and be reconciled with Cardinal Bellarmine who had been responsible for his examination in 1611. On August 31st, Galileo left Florence for Rome where he spent the next seven months under strict orders from the Grand Duke not to leave the city without permission.

During this period, two events occurred which could have led to his condemnation if they had come before the Inquisition: (1) Galileo’s first public announcement of the discovery that Venus shows phases like those of the Moon, and (2) his first conversation with Pope Paul V on the Copernican theory. Both were in agreement with the Tychonic system then being put forward by Cardinal Bellarmine as a compromise between Ptolemaism and Copernicanism.

On April 21st, Galileo wrote from Rome to Castelli at Florence that he had been asked by Pope Paul V about his views on the Earth’s motion. He replied that if the Earth moved, Scripture would have to be re-interpreted accordingly. The Pope was satisfied with this answer but it seems that Cardinal Bellarmine did not approve of it.

On May 26th, Galileo wrote again to Castelli saying that he had just discovered proof for the motion of the Earth from an observation made by Christoph Scheiner, a Jesuit professor at Ingolstadt. The Pope wanted him to explain this new proof as soon as possible and gave permission for him to publish it.

On September 1st, Galileo left Rome with two letters from the Pope: one revoking his order that he should not leave until further notice; another asking him to return within three months if possible.

On October 4th, he arrived in Florence where he stayed until February 1616. On January 27th of that year, Bellarmine sent a letter warning Galileo against defending or teaching the Copernican theory as true because it was contrary to Scripture. This seems to be the final step which led up to the condemnation by the Inquisition on February 26th.

On May 23rd, 1616, an edict was published in Rome stating that “the doctrine of Copernicus is false and altogether opposed to Holy Scripture” and ordering books teaching this theory to be banned. Galileo himself was not mentioned but it seems clear that he was one of those meant by the Inquisition when they referred to defenders or teachers of Copernicanism.

On June 22nd, Cardinal Bellarmine sent a letter informing him that his writings were placed on the Index and forbidding him to hold any discussion about them. He replied expressing surprise at being censured without having been heard in his own defence but promised obedience to papal authority.

In July of the same year, an edict was issued from Florence stating that anyone who taught or defended Copernicanism would be punished by the Grand Duke’s officers as well as those of the Inquisition.

On August 11th, Galileo wrote a letter to Father Benedetto Castelli saying he had been ordered not to hold any discussion about Copernicanism and that he hoped soon to return to Rome where he could explain himself in person. This was his last reference to these events before publishing his Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems (Dialogo dei massimi sistemi) in 1632, which led directly to his condemnation by the Inquisition.

On February 24th, 1616, Cardinal Bellarmine and another theologian visited Galileo at his house in Florence to warn him against holding any discussion about Copernicanism. On March 5th, he wrote to Castelli saying that he had been forbidden by order of Pope Paul V from defending or teaching this theory.

On April 12th, Cardinal Bellarmine sent a letter informing him that the Inquisition was examining his book on sunspots and would soon publish their decree concerning it. He replied expressing surprise at being accused without having been heard in his own defence but promised obedience to papal authority.

In May of the same year, an edict was issued from Florence stating that anyone who taught or defended Copernicanism would be punished by the Grand Duke’s officers as well as those of the Inquisition. On July 1st, Galileo wrote a letter informing Castelli that he had been ordered not to hold any discussion about this theory and hoped soon to return to Rome where he could explain himself in person.

In December of 1616, Father Benedetto Castelli visited him at his house in Florence and reported on what had happened since their last meeting. Galileo told him that Cardinal Bellarmine had come with two other theologians to warn him against holding any discussion about Copernicanism because it was contrary to Holy Scripture.

On January 2nd, 1617, he wrote a letter informing Castelli that an edict had been issued from Florence stating that anyone who taught or defended Copernicanism would be punished by the Grand Duke’s officers as well as those of the Inquisition.

In March of that year, Cardinal Bellarmine sent a letter informing him that his book on sunspots was being examined and would soon be published with their decree concerning it. He replied expressing surprise at being accused without having been heard in his own defence but promised obedience to papal authority.

On April 11th, Galileo wrote from Florence saying he hoped soon to return to Rome where he could explain himself in person. This was his last reference to these events before publishing his Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems (Dialogo dei massimi sistemi) in 1632 which led directly to his condemnation by the Inquisition.

On February 24th, 1616, Cardinal Bellarmine and another theologian visited Galileo at his house in Florence to warn him against holding any discussion about Copernicanism. On March 5th, he wrote to Castelli saying that he had been forbidden by order of Pope Paul V from defending or teaching this theory.

On April 12th, Cardinal Bellarmine sent a letter informing him that the Inquisition was examining his book on sunspots and would soon publish their decree concerning it. He replied expressing surprise at being accused without having been heard in his own defence but promised obedience to papal authority.

In May of the same year, an edict was issued from Florence stating that anyone who taught or defended Copernicanism would be punished by the Grand Duke’s officers as well as those of the Inquisition. On July 1st, Galileo wrote a letter informing Castelli that he had been ordered not to hold any discussion about this theory and hoped soon to return to Rome where he could explain himself in person.

In December of 1616, Father Benedetto Castelli visited him at his house in Florence and reported on what had happened since their last meeting. Galileo told him that Cardinal Bellarmine had come with two other theologians to warn him against holding any discussion about Copernicanism because it was contrary to Holy Scripture.

On January 2nd, 1617, he wrote a letter informing Castelli that an edict had been issued from Florence stating that anyone who taught or defended Copernicanism would be punished by the Grand Duke’s officers as well as those of the Inquisition.


He was informed that the culprit had been about two years in prison. He says the Cardinals and Coadjutors were assembled together at the Monastery of the Minerva. The Governor of Rome represented the secular arm. Bruno was brought into the Hall of the Inquisition and forced down on his knees. Sentence was charged with denying the Conception of Christ by a virgin, and the publication in London “of a libel concerning the Triumphant Beast—which is to say the Pope.” 

1 For the purpose of preparing the petition writing materials would be allowed him.
2 Con r. Ritterhaus suo G. Schoppio, vide Berti, op. cit., Appendix I.
3 Struvius, B. G Bi b. hist. lit., Jena, 1754, vol. I, fasc. V.
3 Berti, op. cit., p. 447.

300 GIORDANO BRUNO

