
"and other manifold 'terrible and most absurd doctrines' among which we find those of an eternal universe and innumerable worlds. All this should have been duly set forth in the precious document of which no trace can be found.

'Then,' says Schopp, he was unfrocked, excommunicated, and handed over to the secular arm.' The office of formally stripping a priest of his insignia and station should have been singularly unpleasant; but it was by no means unprofitable. The general register of Pontifical expenses bears the record that the bishop of Sidonia received 27 scudi for the degradation of Giordano Bruno, heretic.

The Governor of Rome was addressed in the usual formula: 'take him under your jurisdiction, subject to your decision, so as to be punished with due chastisement; beseeching you, however, as we do earnestly beseech you, so to mitigate the severity of your sentence."


With respect to his body, there may be no danger of death or the shedding of blood. So we, Cardinals, Inquisitor, and General whose names are written beneath decree.

By this hypocritical form, Holy Church was wont to secure its purpose while veiling its infamy. When all these things were done, writes Schopp, “he said not a word except in a menacing way: ‘Perchance your fear in passing judgment on me is greater than mine in receiving.’” The officials of the Governor then conveyed him to the city prison by the Tiber-side.

References:
1. Berti, op. cit., Appendix I, Schopp's letter.
2. Fioren tino, F. Opus latine di G. B., state edition, I, p. xxi.
3. Frith, op. cit., p. 302; also Sacro Arsenale by Schopp.


S Letter

2. The Count di Ventimiglia, a pupil of Bruno, gives the same testimony (Berti, p. 26, note 1).

THE ROMAN PRISON: FINAL SCENES 301

Opposite to the Castle of St. Angelo, at a considerable distance from the Minerva.

So great was the horror of causing the death and eternal damnation of an impenitent sinner that eight days of grace passed by before the sentence was carried into effect. But on February 12th, the Avvisi, a wretched and ill-informed attempt at giving news, informed the Roman world: Today we believe there will be witnessed the doing of a most solemn act of Justice (nor do I know if it be not already finished) on a Dominican monk of Nola, a most obstinate heretic. On Wednesday, at the mansion of Cardinal Madruzzo, he was shown to be the author of diverse horrid opinions.


In which he remained obstinate and does so still, notwithstanding that theologians visit him daily.

The sentence was carried out on the ninth day after the trial without the shedding of blood. For many years, the only account of the tragedy was that of Gaspar Schopp. Catholic apologists declared the letter to be a forgery and claimed that Bruno had only been burned in effigy!

It was long suspected, however, that some document relating to the execution might be found in the Archives of the Brotherhood of Pity of St. John the Beheaded. This group was known for accompanying heretics to the stake and attempting to move an obdurate soul while ensuring "a happy journey."

It was stoutly denied that any such record existed, and examination of the archives was refused to many of the most eminent Italian scholars. But when Crispi was in power, he desired to inquire into this matter.


; Op. cit., Appendix I. — Pognisi, A.; G.B. l'archivio di S.G. Decollato, Torino, 1891, p. 62. The prison was called the Tower of Non.

2 Desdouits, Théophile; La Légende tragique de B., comment elle a été formée, son origine suspecte, son invraisemblance, Paris, 1885.

3 Pognisi, op. cit., p. 63.

302 GIORDANO BRUNO  
finances of the Brotherhood. They thought that, as so many applications had been made concerning Bruno, this was what Crispi was at, and forthwith in order to avoid...


Further inconvenient investigations revealed to the Royal Commissioner the presence of an entry concerning him in their registers. It was discovered that the Company had records of the roasting to death of 25 other people during the sixteenth century, with some of these "solemn acts of justice" being aggravated by atrocious cruelty.

The journal of the Provveditore records:

"Justice done on an impenitent heretic. At the second hour of the night information came that justice would be done on an impenitent friar in the morning. Hence, at the sixth hour of the night, the Comforters and the chaplain assembled at S. Ursula and went to the prison in the Tower of Nona, entered the chapel, and offered up the winter-prayers. To them was consigned the man Giordano Bruno, son of Giorgio Bruno, an apostate friar from Nola in the Kingdom."


An impenitent individual was exhorted by our brothers in all love. Two Fathers from the Order of St. Dominic and two from the Order of Jesus were called in, along with two from the new Church and one from St. Jerome. These individuals, with great zeal and learning, showed him his error; yet he remained firm throughout and to the end in his accursed obstinacy. He set his brain and mind to a thousand errors and vain gloryings and continued steadfastly stubborn while conducted by the Servants of Justice to the Field of Flowers (Campo di Fiori). There, he was stripped, bound to a stake, and burned alive.

Throughout this ordeal, Giordano Bruno's father was alive in 1586. However, we do not know if his mother still lived; we only hear of her during an examination at Venice.

That which is divine in the universe.
