
Schopp, writing to his Protestant friend Conrad Rittershausen on February 17th, 1600, tells him that when the heretic was led to the stake that day, although already dying, he turned his face aside in disdain when the crucifix was held out to him. At last, he had come to understand the actual worth of dialectic doublings and glozings and an official Religion of Love. He had done with all that now, mocked by the imbecile zealots who, almost from Calvary, have converted the symbol of self-sacrifice into an engine for letting loose all the devils that lurk in the human bosom to rage and rend.

He had sung of despising death; he had written of being so deeply possessed by other thoughts as not to feel the last agony. That he was victor over the grave we know; that supreme confidence in a rational universe so filled his soul that his senses were dead to the torment of the stake, we may piously hope.

So closed a life marked by supreme unity of purpose—to


Know the truth and declare it.

He perished in Jubilee year. Men from all countries flocked to Rome. Fifty cardinals were assembled there. Processions, confessions, kneelings at altars went on all day. Rome resounded with penitential psalms. Tradesmen and harlots did a busy trade. People walked along the broad new streets and marveled at them and at the new cut by which Sixtus V had joined the Lateran with the Vatican in the newly populated area where a waste had existed ever since Robert Guiscard burned half the city of Hildebrand to the ground; they admired the great buildings.

Little notice was taken of the fire that was lit early that morning in the Field of Flowers. It was no startling novelty; only a minor event.

1 Cantii, Cesare; Gli Eretici d'Italia, 1867, p. 62. The quotation is from Porphyry's Life of Plotinus.

2 De Immensa.


I. 3 Sig. Sigill.

THE ROMAN PRISON: FINAL SCENES

Excitement was thrown in with other allurements of a holiday. The culprit made his painful way over the tufa stones with bare feet. He was chained by the neck and wore a white sheet emblazoned at the corners with the cross of St. Andrew, illuminated here and there with devils and red flames. Accompanied by a procession of priests singing litanies, exhorting him to repent, and thrusting the crucifix before his eyes; the Brotherhood carried torches and officials of the Governor of Rome acted as guard.

Arrived at the Open Space where the fashionable frivolity of the ancient city was once wonted to crowd into the Theatre of Pompey, whose ruins still guarded the Field of Flowers, all the rabble of Rome who now dwelt around it were assembled for this "Roman holiday."

Narducci discovered at the Vatican that the precise spot where Bruno was burned was in front of a house at the corner of the Campo di Fiori and the Vicolo Baretti, where there is a stone inscribed with Latin verses put up by the Superintendent.


Streets in the Fifteenth Century

That Jubilee was remembered for celebrating the success of Clement’s foreign policy and the submission of Catholics to the yoke of discipline. Bruno's small part in it was forgotten almost from the moment his ashes were scattered to the winds, in accordance with the official direction concerning heretics.

The strange delay in dealing effectively with him was repeated in the case of his writings. They were not placed on the Index until 25 years later (August 7th). Since in Catholic countries the possessor of proscribed works placed himself in grave peril, original specimens have become very rare. His books never achieved popularity. The English deists who rediscovered him in the early part of the eighteenth century tried to make much of him and failed.

Giordano Bruno  
1 Levy, op. cit., p. 390, n. 1.


His name practically disappeared. Then, in the vigorous youth of German Philosophy, Jacobi recognized his genius, which was generally acknowledged by German thinkers, though his works were not closely studied. Hegel and Schelling found in him a kindred spirit.

In 1847, a Frenchman named Christian Bartholomès, furnished with scanty material laboriously collected, attempted a biography and gave the world a well-considered criticism of his published works. Since then, research has been conducted in Germany, France, England, and especially in Italy, resulting in valuable monographs.

During his researches, Ranke came across a portion of the record of the trial at Venice. Valuable documents were afterwards discovered, and scholars such as Fiorentino, Berti, and Tocco devoted years to the examination of Bruno’s life and works. After the unification of Italy, his countrymen caught fire. A complete edition of his writings, including unpublished manuscripts, was issued in volumes.


By volume. For a time there was a veritable Brunomania.

The man more God-intoxicated than Spinoza even, was hailed in the eighties by materialists and monists and hide-bound scientists claiming to be metaphysicians as their harbinger in the 16th century. The general enthusiasm reached its climax on June 9, 1889. Thirty thousand people assembled, most of whom could never have read Bruno or formed any sound judgment as to his merits; they only knew he had been martyred by the Papacy. And to the ordinary Roman, who from time immemorial has never been able to abide a Pope or subsist without one, that was occasion enough.

All followed the Syndic to the Field of Flowers, where a monument had been erected in memory of yet another great Italian; and this statue of the Nolan was unveiled. There was much feasting, and the guests hurried from dinner back to the monument to illuminate it. It is said that Leo XIII fasted throughout the day.

Giordano Bruno did not possess that gift of practical wisdom in the conduct of his own life which we hold in such high esteem today. One of the most original thinkers—or rather let us say, one of the most penetrative seers—


Makes the safe and successful man was withheld from him. He experienced little but protracted buffetings from adverse fate. And the man who, in many respects, marched generations ahead of his fellows had the evil fortune to influence directly only one great thinker. But that thinker was Baruch Spinoza, and after all, to influence Baruch Spinoza was much. The intrepid constancy of the martyr for the right to think is more. It raises the human measure for faithfulness and strengthens reverence for what is highest and best in man. Bruno fell like a first blossom of spring, foredoomed to be withered, to fail of its function, and to fall. But it is the promise of a thousand to follow, which shall not fail but fructify.


